The Gource software project history visualization tool (https://gource.io/) can
be used to visualize BRL-CAD's git history.  The default settings will produce
a long video, so below we've collected some options that can be passed to
produce variations in the visualization.

This gist has a useful script for overview purposes, although I had better luck
outputting an mpg file rather than mp4.  Also, for our repo the title (in the
lower left) doesn't interact well with other visual elements and the font size
in this script is a bit large.  Also, the --date-format "%F" option is need to
make the date readout readable.
https://gist.github.com/eribeiro/5b7179f432bfffffe53d


NOTE:  For partial history visualization the following feature would be nice:

https://github.com/acaudwell/Gource/issues/116

At some point if we need a more nuanced view we should investigate the custom
log option noted in the comments...


Options:


-s 0.05

If we want to get a rapid visual overview of the whole project, we need to set
the seconds per day value to something fairly small.

--date-format "%F"

Gives a YYYY-MM-DD fixed size date readout, which is needed when rapidly playing
history (variable width jumps around too fast to be readable.)

--key

Reports statistics and color coding for file types in a column on the left of
the image.

--hide filenames,dirnames

Suppress the text labels.  When our repo gets large in the later stages, the
names are too crowded to read.

--hide mouse,progress,files,filenames,dirnames

This hide version from the gist script simplifies the visual further.

--1920x1080

Adjusts the default aspect ratio to be more in line with typical video
generation.



Line I use for MPG generation:

gource --date-format "%F" -s 0.06 --key --1920x1080 --hide filenames,dirnames,mouse,progress --file-idle-time 0 --max-files 0 --highlight-users --multi-sampling --stop-at-end --auto-skip-seconds .1 --output-ppm-stream -  --output-framerate 30 | ffmpeg -y -r 30 -f image2pipe -vcodec ppm -i - -b 65536K movie.mpg

