BREP RAYTRACE IMPLEMENTATION CURRENT STATE
==========================================

Last updated: 2026-08-09
Repository: /home/cyapp/brlcad
Implementation specification: brep_raytrace_plan.txt
Active objective: Implement the complete specification, preserving this file
as the authoritative continuation log until all acceptance gates pass.


CURRENT PHASE
-------------

2026-08-09 ACTIVE LOCAL CLEANUP AND SC STRATUM COMPLETION

The loop-topology checkpoint is committed locally as 6e2c6f4ad6, "Make BREP
trim classification topology aware".  It was not pushed.  The final selected
object in the initial 14-database ray stratum, the 848-face SC solid, exposed
a direction-dependent legacy hit-cleanup failure even though adaptive depths
three and eight found the same nine surface roots.

SC deterministic pair 22 mixed one genuinely coincident near-hit/near-miss
observation with a later near-miss/clean pair several model units apart.  The
historical code let sorted adjacency imply event identity and erased or
reinterpreted the distant pair.  It then deleted a complete trailing suffix
after an unmatched entry, whereas the reversed stream retained the analogous
balanced interval.  The fixed and allocating cleanup implementations now
require the existing model-derived ray-parameter coincidence envelope for
every near-miss interaction.  They remove unmatched entries in a reverse scan
and unmatched exits in a forward scan before nonzero-winding compaction.  The
two scans exchange under ray reversal and retain the maximal balanced stream.

The C++ cleanup corpus contains reduced exact streams for both defects.  Exact
SC pair 22 and the complete 70-ray legacy-only comparison now pass in both
directions at depths three and eight.  The full prepared trace also passes,
but selects none of its 35 eligible rays: 31 are uncertified, two exhaust the
surface-box workspace, and two fail event classification.  Its 2,498
candidate spans, 18,336 subdivision boxes, 1,235 isolated boxes, and 225
unresolved physical events reinforce the planned performance priority:
profile normal production and reduce face/span candidate and proof work before
tuning Newton evaluation.  Correctness gates remain authoritative, production
depth remains eight, and the Abert-informed optimization phase follows only
after broader analytic and imported qualification.

2026-08-09 ACTIVE IMPORTED-RAY DEPTH COMPARISON AND STATUS-2 POLES

The preceding database profiling checkpoint is committed locally as
56363b08b6, "Profile BREP SurfaceTrees across databases".  It was not pushed.
The current checkpoint adds the missing ray-partition gate between the
experimental adaptive depth three and the production default eight, then uses
the first genuine imported failure it finds to extend prepared authority.

`brep-audit` now accepts

  --ray-depth-compare --candidate-depth=3 --reference-depth=8 \
    --ray-count=N file.g brep

and emits one `brlcad-brep-ray-depth-comparison-v1` JSON record.  Three
centered axis chords and N fixed-seed random sphere chords are shot in both
directions.  Each depth is prepared independently with direct primitive prep,
the complete returned segment list is sorted and validated, and the deeper
tree is destroyed before the shallower tree is built.  The core gate requires
finite ordered solid intervals, equality between depths within the active
model tolerance plus a coordinate-roundoff floor, and exact forward/reverse
line invariance under `t_reverse = chord_length - t_forward`.  Failure records
include the line and both depth/direction interval streams.

Direct prep is a correctness requirement, not merely an audit convenience.
The persistent librt prep-cache key currently hashes the object and transform
but not an explicitly requested adaptive SurfaceTree depth, and serialized
version-one BREP prep data does not record that request.  An `rt_gettree`
comparison could therefore load the same cached tree twice.  This audit calls
`ft_prep` on a freshly loaded BREP for each depth, verifies
`_rt_brep_prep_stats.surface_tree_depth_limit`, and never opens the prep cache.
Any future production-default change must revisit cache identity/versioning.

The JSON separately reports nodes, leaves, physical depth, CurveTree size,
prep time, hit/miss/segment counts, normal-orientation anomalies, prepared
attempt/selection and every fallback reason, surface boxes and proof work,
fixed-workspace exhaustion, physical-event state, seam/singular/regular/edge/
vertex certificates, and fixed-versus-allocating and local-versus-legacy
diagnostics.  In trace mode a selected prepared result is still followed by
the legacy solve for equivalence telemetry; `solver_calls` is therefore audit
work and must not be reported as normal production cost.  Normal production
returns immediately after a prepared selection.

The first three 70-ray imported runs establish useful but still small
continuity evidence:

  * `non_grabcad/0353/0353-02-57.g`, `Product_step18_item.s`: 186 faces,
    20 segments on 16 hit rays, ten prepared selections, 19 surface-box and
    41 uncertified fallbacks, zero depth or reversal differences.  Depth
    three/eight uses 2,633/77,858 nodes and 1,749/39,378 leaves.
  * `nist/NIST_MBE_PMI_4.g`, `Document_item.s`: 495 faces, 20 segments on
    14 hit rays, 14 selections, eight surface-box and 48 uncertified
    fallbacks, zero depth or reversal differences, and maximum depth-to-depth
    endpoint shift `9.17e-9`.  Depth three/eight uses 32,460/659,363 nodes and
    18,918/333,584 leaves.
  * `non_grabcad/recurta/step_ap203/10145.g`, `id2_item.s`: depth three and
    eight returned identical results, but the first run exposed one shared
    reversal failure.  The +Y line from `(0,-2.3815698604072066,0)` returned
    `[1.1315698604072066,3.6315698604072066]`; the same line from the opposite
    endpoint in the -Y direction missed.  Both depths overflowed the prepared
    32,768-box surface workspace and fell back to the legacy Utah path.  This
    is the concrete imported version of the remembered sphere-pole failure.

`10145.g` is a one-face solid radius-1.25 `ON_RevSurface` sphere.  Its rational
order-3-by-3, 9-by-5 NURBS form returns status 2, with four-by-two spans and
domains `[0,2.5*pi]` and `[-1.25*pi,1.25*pi]`.  The earlier pole theorem only
marked status-1 NURBS singular sides; the converted-ELL C/C++ fixtures could
not exercise this representation.  The fallback result was direction
dependent even though SurfaceTree density was not.

Prepared pole authority is now extended narrowly to valid `ON_RevSurface`
status-2 forms.  OpenNURBS constructs that form as the tensor product of an
angular arc and the profile curve, optionally transposed, so a singular
profile endpoint remains the corresponding collapsed NURBS boundary.  Prep
records this class-specific map only when both the original surface and the
converted NURBS declare the same singular side.  Ray time still validates
collapsed homogeneous controls, the scale-aware line witness, exact outward
deflation/exclusion and determinant sign, a pointwise parameter round trip,
3-D locus agreement for both the mapped pole and an interior one-sided normal
sample, and face CurveTree inclusion.  A classifier result marked trimmed is
accepted only within the existing edge-miss tolerance; a genuinely
trimmed-away pole still fails closed.  The complete fiber and
alternating/minimum-segment theorem remains unchanged.

A singular deflation proof now gets first refusal before a coefficient-hull
exclusion.  This is needed after small or distant rotated similarities, where
construction roundoff can place one ray-plane hull strictly on one side even
though its collapsed pole is within the separately proved line bound.  A
failed singular proof leaves the original hull exclusion intact; it does not
turn an ordinary miss into a candidate.  General status-2 seams, trim edges,
vertices, folds outside the existing clean policies, and arbitrary surface
classes remain unsupported without their own interval or class-specific map
proof.

The permanent in-memory pole corpus now builds analytic `ON_RevSurface`
spheres with the STEP-style arc-length domains and transforms the completed
BREP as a whole.  It shoots both revolution-axis directions at scale 1.25,
scale 0.01 after translation and arbitrary rotation, and scale 10,000 after
million-unit translation and another rotation.  All six rays must observe a
status-2 face and select the exact prepared singular theorem at adaptive depth
two.  They pass.  The repaired imported object now passes all 70 rays: 22 hit
rays, 66 prepared selections, four uncertified clean-miss fallbacks, zero
depth/reversal differences, zero maximum endpoint difference, no box
overflow, and 343/16,215 depth-three/eight nodes.  Its 32-random-chord audit
falls from the earlier pathological tens of seconds to about 0.66 seconds on
this host, primarily because the certified pole pair no longer drives the
trace into exhaustive local boxing and legacy fallback.

Focused optimized gates pass 8/8: directed analytic rays, status-1/status-2
poles, grazing trend, hard Crofton replay, regular stream, complete seam/Cobb
grid, and both audit modes.  The final-source seam grid took 280.46 seconds
(280.50 seconds for the parallel group).  ASAN/UBSAN
with leak scanning disabled passes the transformed pole fixture, the 14-ray
converted sphere audit, and the six-ray imported failure replay with no
diagnostic.  The production adaptive default remains eight.  Depth eight is
a continuity reference here, not a truth oracle; analytic implicit/BREP
Cauchy-Crofton tests remain the ground truth for shapes with exact
conversions.

Next extend this direct comparison across the recorded STEP strata, retaining
identical deterministic rays and fallback distributions.  Add face- and
feature-targeted lines because random chords undersample sparse parts and
almost never hit exact seams, poles, or grazes.  Promote each new discrepancy
into the C/C++ hard corpus with its line and event trace.  Only after the
partition, cache, sanitizer, and analytic-oracle gates are broad enough should
adaptive depth three replace eight.  Then profile normal (non-trace) prepared
production to prioritize face/span BVHs, compact trim data, vectorized
coefficient rejection, batched `vshot`, and only then evaluator/Newton tuning.

2026-08-09 ACTIVE STRATIFIED SURFACETREE CORPUS PROFILING

The structural-knot/regular-stream checkpoint is committed locally as
49c518ad50, "Certify BREP streams after structural splits".  It was not
pushed.  This increment adds reproducible database-wide preparation
profiling rather than choosing a production depth from two hand-selected
objects.

brep-audit now accepts

  --surface-trees-all --surface-tree-depth=N file.g

and emits one `brlcad-brep-surface-tree-database-summary-v1` JSON document.
It profiles every BREP object serially, avoiding simultaneous retention of
all trees, while reporting per-object scale, object status and reason,
failure faces/domains, loops, trims, native/rational NURBS makeup, exact and
status-2 form counts, maximum orders/CVs/spans, adaptive and physical depth,
nodes, leaves, CurveTree leaves, build time, and process peak RSS.  The final
record also contains database totals.  Empty or unloadable BREP objects are
distinguished from actual SurfaceTree face failures.  The original detailed
single-object mode remains available and now reports scale and object failure
reason as well.  A repository CTest runs the all-object path at adaptive depth
zero on regress/nurbs/sph.g.

The first paired stratum contains 14 databases, 75 BREP objects, 5,778 faces,
6,454 loops, and 28,798 trims.  It includes one-face and planar fixtures,
mixed analytic/status-2 STEP conversions, three NIST models, trim-heavy
bearings, a 21-object database, native rational NURBS, order-six/high-span
surfaces, SC_solid_stp_20260429.g, and all 40 BREP objects in FRAME.g.  Object
diagonals range from 4.33 to 1,197 model units.  The faces comprise 1,910
native NURBS, 3,650 rational NURBS forms, 3,473 exact forms, and 2,305
reparameterized forms.  Every face builds successfully at both adaptive
depths three and eight.

Across this paired stratum, the exact structural counts are:

                         adaptive 3       adaptive 8       depth-8/depth-3
  SurfaceTree nodes          664,796        15,165,658            22.81
  SurfaceTree leaves         419,208         7,637,698            18.22
  CurveTree leaves           884,649           884,649             1.00
  summed build seconds        18.630           339.180            18.21

The node ratio ranges from 4.79 to 47.27 per database, with median 23.32;
structural complexity therefore changes the benefit but does not erase it.
Build times are useful directional measurements, not a controlled benchmark:
moderate pairs ran in bounded parallel process groups, whereas the two
largest depth-eight cases ran alone.  Counts, failure results, and peak RSS
remain process-local and exact.

The high-span examples quantify the resource stakes.  The 848-face order-six
SC solid changes from 264,544 nodes, 167,741 leaves, physical depth 10,
4.064 seconds, and 156 MB RSS at adaptive depth three to 3,274,514 nodes,
1,669,855 leaves, physical depth 14, 52.420 seconds, and 942 MB at depth
eight.  FRAME changes from 281,379 nodes, 179,608 leaves, physical depth 11,
6.298 seconds, and 260 MB to 9,420,969 nodes, 4,727,854 leaves, physical depth
16, 153.138 seconds, and 2.45 GB.  CurveTree leaves remain 60,527 and 327,803
respectively; trim acceleration is consequently a first-class residual
performance target after surface density falls.

Two additional depth-three stress strata also build without a SurfaceTree
face failure.  Antikythera Mechanism 3dprint.g covers 75 BREP objects, 11,575
faces, order-six native surfaces, and up to 240 spans in one direction.
tork.g builds all 529 faces in seven nonempty BREP objects; its eighth BREP
directory entry, None_item_step38603.s, is empty and is now reported as such
rather than misdiagnosed as a tree failure.

The new optimized CTest passes.  ASAN/UBSAN runs of both the one-object
depth-zero and 21-object depth-three database modes pass with leak scanning
disabled and no diagnostic.  The production adaptive default remains eight.
This profiling proves a large prep opportunity and a plausible experimental
plateau; it does not prove arbitrary STEP rays correct at depth three.  Next
expand the reproducible manifest across corpus quantiles and couple it to
prepared-ray attempt/selection/fallback and exact-partition evidence before
changing the default.

2026-08-09 ACTIVE STRUCTURAL-KNOT CONTRACT AND DEPTH PLATEAU

SurfaceTree construction has two distinct kinds of recursion, and the
configured limit must govern only one of them.  Closed-surface seams and every
interior NURBS span knot define structural subdomains on which flatness,
bounding, and ray-root reasoning are meaningful.  Those splits are now
exhausted unconditionally.  Only after a leaf no longer crosses a structural
boundary does its recursion restart at zero and apply the requested adaptive
flatness/straightness depth budget.  The old ordering checked the shared
depth counter before the structural phase and could therefore stop with a
leaf crossing interior knots at a sufficiently small requested limit.  That
made reduced-depth behavior accidental and invalidated the intended meaning
of the experimental control.

The current libbrep change moves the depth termination behind the
structural-phase predicate.  A new brep_surfacetree_knots regression builds a
smooth 6-by-5-span NURBS surface with adaptive depth zero, requires exactly 30
leaves, and verifies that no leaf interval strictly contains any interior
knot.  It passes.  Requested depth is consequently an adaptive budget;
observed BBNode depth is the physical structural-plus-adaptive depth and can
legitimately be larger.  Test and audit reporting now say this explicitly.
Do not reintroduce a common cap unless a separate proof establishes a safe
structural fallback; arbitrary BREPs cannot assume knot-crossing boxes have
well-behaved parameter or derivative bounds.

This semantic change invalidates serialized SurfaceTrees even though their
byte layout is unchanged.  rt_brep_prep_serialize now emits cache version one
and rejects version-zero entries, which may contain leaves crossing internal
knots.  Such entries are rebuilt rather than trusted.  The cache still does
not encode the requested adaptive depth, so deserialized statistics report
that request as unknown while measuring the physical hierarchy actually
loaded.  The complete optimized serial/parallel BREP cache matrix now passes
all seven cases, including parallel single-object, identical-object,
different-object, and hierarchy preparation.

With the corrected contract, the focused clean regular-stream ratchet passes
at adaptive depth zero with 25 nodes and 16 leaves across the RCC, cone, and
torus fixtures; the physical maximum depth is two.  The 24-case hard replay
passes every torus case, including exact seam-aligned directions, at adaptive
depth one.  The deliberately near-trim disjoint-sphere-union line remains the
only failure at adaptive depths one and two.  Adaptive depth three passes the
complete hard replay with 2,513 nodes, 1,844 leaves, and physical maximum
depth five.  This is a useful conservative floor, not a claim that depth
three is globally minimal.

The broad evidence at adaptive depth three is now green.  The identical-line
Cauchy-Crofton gate passes all 21 BREP preparations with zero implicit/BREP
partition differences, including sphere, ellipsoid, RCC, cone, torus,
nontrivial CSG, nested transformed BREP leaves, and sewn Cobb cases.  It uses
10,410 nodes, 7,682 leaves, and physical maximum depth five.  The complete
seam/crack/classifier shard also passes: 78 solids, 26,637 nodes, 17,676
leaves, physical maximum depth five, the same two intended prepared
promotions, and no partition regression or ambiguity.  The grazing gate
passes as well.  These results establish a plausible common correctness
plateau for the current corpus while preserving mandatory structural
decomposition.  The production default remains eight until the remaining
stratified STEP-corpus distribution is checked.  Focused sanitizer,
rebuilt-cache, and broad optimized correctness gates are already green as
recorded below.

The full optimized CTest gate now passes 18/18 shards after updating one stale
coverage ratchet.  The regular-stream theorem increases prepared production
selection in the 416-ray Cobb seam matrix from 124 to exactly 322 at both
adaptive depth three and the production default.  All 22 seam certificates,
44 seam events, two intended partition promotions, oracle intervals, and
ambiguity/regression counts are unchanged.  The assertion now requires the
new exact 322 count; this was theorem coverage growth, not a geometry or
tolerance change.

2026-08-09 LATER PERFORMANCE WORKSTREAM RECORDED

Correctness remains first, but the plan now contains a dedicated performance
phase after density reduction and cache qualification.  The legacy solver is
recognizably descended from Abert, Geimer, and Muller (2006): two orthogonal
ray planes, a UV Newton solve, and surface-box UV seeds.  BRL-CAD did not
adopt that work's principal performance machinery, notably precomputed SIMD
Cox-de Boor evaluation and four-ray packets.  The new phase does not propose
recreating it verbatim.  It first profiles the certified pipeline, removes
global traversal work, builds a real object-level face/span BVH, compacts
immutable rational-Bezier and trim data, vectorizes coefficient projection
and conservative rejection, and implements a true batched rt_brep_vshot.
Newton/evaluator optimization follows only if profiles justify it.

Sloup and Havran (2021) is added as a modern performance reference for compact
two-dimensional trim search and GPU feasibility.  GPU work remains optional
and later; double precision, divergence, transfer cost, and CPU certification
must be measured.  Every optimization is promoted independently under the
same analytic, grazing, seam, nested-CSG, and exact-line Crofton partition
gates.  Do not trade the solid-event or crack-tolerance contract for visual
rendering throughput.

Focused ASAN/UBSAN checks pass with leak scanning disabled for the new
multi-span structural-knot test, the depth-zero regular-stream production
ratchet, and the complete 24-case hard replay at adaptive depth three.  There
are no sanitizer diagnostics.  The hard run retains 2,513 nodes and 1,844
leaves with physical maximum depth five under instrumentation.

Two imported STEP samples show that the depth-three plateau has material prep
benefit even after mandatory structural splitting.  On the 462-face
Product_step18_item.s, adaptive depth three versus eight changes serial
SurfaceTree nodes from 123,919 to 5,392, leaves from 62,451 to 3,263, build
time from 2.577 to 0.154 seconds, and peak RSS from 59.8 to 46.9 MB; physical
maximum depth is five versus ten.  CurveTree leaves remain 13,060.  On the
status-2-heavy 175-face Product_step46_item.s (33 exact and 142
reparameterized faces), nodes change from 199,958 to 7,755, leaves from
98,758 to 4,888, time from 5.930 to 0.364 seconds, and peak RSS from 87.2 to
41.9 MB.  CurveTree leaves remain 36,385.  These are strong samples but not
yet the required stratified corpus distribution; do not change the production
default from them alone.

2026-08-09 ACTIVE COMPLETE REGULAR EVENT STREAM

This checkpoint adds a deterministic --crofton-hard-only replay
corpus and a clean-interior regular-stream theorem.  The replay regenerates
the fixed-seed 8000-line Crofton sequence, shoots only named indices, compares
complete implicit/BREP partitions, and prints the exact line plus production
trace on failure.  A --regular-stream-only subset requires the new prepared
path and is registered in CTest at SurfaceTree depth zero.  The full hard mode
runs at the production default and retains the exact torus seam-multiplicity
and disjoint-sphere near-boundary cases for later increments.

The first traces disproved the narrower periodic-lateral hypothesis.  RCC and
cone failures usually had one cap root and one lateral root; both were already
Krawczyk-certified, but their coarse t enclosures overlapped and the otherwise
correct ENTER/LEAVE events failed the complete-line state check.  Random torus
failures had two correct roots on different spans, often with one additional
unresolved rootless box around an already observed endpoint.  The missing
abstraction was a complete stream of independently certified physical root
components, not another nonlinear root finder.

The new theorem is screened to clean, non-grazing, trim-inside roots forming
an alternating stream with every material segment larger than the BRL-CAD
minimum.  It runs only when an unresolved terminal box remains or ordinary
coarse event t intervals overlap.  For each same-face/span physical root it
uses the existing fixed-workspace component proof to own all connected boxes
and exclude any rootless remainder inside that component.  It then constructs
a separate strict local Krawczyk/determinant certificate and tight t enclosure
around the corrected root.  It never takes a parameter-space hull across
faces or spans.  Every local root and terminal box must belong to exactly one
component; every component determinant must agree with the independently
tightened event determinant and the outward normal direction.  Only after all
components pass are boxes marked, events published, and the complete
alternating/minimum-segment state machine run.  Status-2 faces are allowed
only for regular interior events because all authority remains in their NURBS
parameter space and only the final point is mapped for publication.  The path
adds no ray-time allocation, random perturbation, mutable global, or
SurfaceTree traversal dependency.

At depth two the theorem closes all selected random RCC, cone, and torus
failures: 5/5 for each fixture.  The focused production-path ratchet also
passes at depth zero with seven SurfaceTree nodes/leaves across the three
BREPs.  A complete depth-two Crofton rerun now gives zero differing lines for
RCC and cone (formerly 12 and 9) and reduces torus from 114 differing lines to
10.  All previously passing sphere, ellipsoid, ARB8, Cobb, and CSG fixtures
remain at zero except the already known disjoint-sphere line.  The current
full depth-two result is 16 comparison failures total: three exact torus
directed cases, ten random torus lines plus its aggregate discrepancy, and one
disjoint-sphere-union line.

The remaining traces divide cleanly again.  Torus line 737 has one fully
certified fold root and one regular root; it needs a general mixed
fold/regular stream across spans.  Lines 2477 and 3819 enter the new stream but
leave a box unowned; failure-stage telemetry is being refined to distinguish
root, box, and event ownership.  Lines 2399 and 2977, plus disjoint-sphere
1262, contain a valid trim-inside root classified NEAR_HIT at a parameter or
topological boundary and are intentionally excluded from the clean theorem.
The exact torus diameter and vertical tube lines have several UV
representations of the same physical events across status-2 spans and remain
a separate source-union problem.  Do not loosen CLEAN_HIT tests without an
interval/topological proof that preserves crack handling.

2026-08-09 POST-POLE REDUCED-DEPTH CROFTON BOUNDARY

The committed pole theorem was followed by a complete paired-Crofton run at
SurfaceTree depth two.  The sphere (32000 lines), oblate ellipsoid (8000), and
ARB8 (8000) have zero differing implicit/BREP lines.  The ellipsoid pole miss
reported before the pole theorem is gone.  The overlapping-sphere union,
sphere lens, sphere cavity, box-minus-cylinder, nested transformed sphere
shell, and sewn Cobb sphere also have zero differing lines.

The remaining primitive differences are localized.  The RCC has 12 differing
lines of 8000, the truncated cone has 9, and the torus has 114 plus three
directed partition failures.  The first RCC indices are 649, 1789, 2073, 2219,
and 2961; the first cone indices are 649, 2219, 3053, 3684, and 4103.  The two
fixtures use the same bounding sphere and therefore the same deterministic
lines.  Shared failures 649 and 2219 strongly implicate the periodic lateral
surface decomposition or its ownership rather than a primitive-specific
implicit solve.  Their missing material chords are 0.325--1.444 model units,
well above the 0.0005 modeling tolerance but short relative to the fixtures.
The first torus indices are 122, 148, 158, 189, and 198, with missing chords
2.05--5.88; its directed failures include the two-interval diameter in both
directions and the vertical tube line.  This is a broader completeness case,
not merely a close same-span pair.  The disjoint-sphere union has one differing
line, index 1262 with chord 3.12287, likely exposing the same unresolved
cross-span/leaf behavior through CSG evaluation.

The immediate implementation step is a fast deterministic C/C++ replay mode.
It must regenerate the fixed-seed 8000-line sequence, select these exact
indices, compare complete implicit and BREP partitions, and report the BREP
prepared trace.  Do not make the known-failing reduced-depth replay a default
CTest until its production certificate is implemented.  Use the trace to test
the current hypothesis that RCC/cone roots occupy adjacent Bezier spans of one
periodic face and therefore miss the existing same-face-and-same-span regular
pair theorem.  Preserve full torus cases separately: they may require a
general multi-span source-union/component proof rather than the narrow lateral
surface extension.

2026-08-09 ACTIVE DEGENERATE-POLE CORPUS AND THEOREM

The regular-root-pair increment is committed locally as 146a61a9cb,
"Certify close BREP regular root pairs".  It was not pushed.  The current
increment, "Certify collapsed BREP pole events", is also committed locally
and was not pushed.  It implements and tests a complete-line collapsed-pole
theorem.  The production SurfaceTree default remains eight and the version-zero
cache payload is unchanged.

Controlled-depth results isolate a parameter-degeneracy defect rather than a
generic nonlinear convergence failure.  The full directed sphere suite fails
at depth two, passes at depth three, produces invalid normals at depth four,
misses the large translated pole at depths five and six, and passes at depth
seven.  At the failing depths, a sphere pole appears as many roots with
different U values and one boundary V value even though all those UV pairs
map to one 3-D point.  Arbitrary representatives yield inconsistent limiting
normals and ENTER/LEAVE directions.  At depth two the prepared isolator visits
16384 terminal/fold boxes, retains only the fixed 64-box trace prefix, and
cannot Krawczyk-certify the singular Jacobian.  At depths five and six its fold
logic can find the two geometric endpoint locations, but the ordinary root
and direction ledgers still contain the collapsed fiber's multiplicity and
cannot publish a partition.

Prepared status-1 Bezier spans now record which outer sides inherit an
ON_Surface::IsSingular assertion.  Status-2 parameter remaps remain excluded
because they need an interval proof of the side mapping.  At shot time a
candidate singular span is considered only when it has exactly one singular
side.  Its homogeneous control points must collapse to one finite pole within
a 4096-ulp coordinate-scale allowance; both ray-plane boundary residuals and
the line-to-pole distance must satisfy the same bound.  These checks qualify
the binary64 realization before the OpenNURBS singular-side assertion is used
to set the residual boundary coefficients to exact zero.

If a degree-n Bernstein polynomial is zero at its minimum side, division by
the boundary parameter maps coefficient p_j to (n/j)p_j; the maximum-side
formula uses n/(n-j).  New outward interval deflation applies this identity to
both ray-plane residual surfaces.  A direct coefficient sign, a derivative-
free separating axis over the two-dimensional interval coefficient hull, or
the established rotated-hull test must then exclude zero from the deflated
pair.  This proves that the span contains no line root distinct from the
collapsed side.  The residual Jacobian determinant has the same positive
interior boundary factor; deflating it and requiring every resulting
coefficient to have one strict sign proves the crossing orientation without
using the singular UV Jacobian at the pole.

One-sided normals are sampled at a fixed 1/4096 normalized interior offset and
oriented by the face.  They are not used to establish root existence or
direction: the determinant sign is authoritative.  Before publication every
span belonging to one face/side must be present, have the same determinant
direction, have overlapping ray-parameter enclosures, and have one-sided unit
normals in a common narrow cone.  Their normals are averaged only for the hit
record.  All candidate spans on the entire line must be singular-owned, with
no ordinary terminal box, local root, or fold root left over.  The resulting
pole groups must form a complete alternating ENTER/LEAVE stream with every
gap larger than BRL-CAD's minimum-segment tolerance.  Mixed pole/regular
streams, multiple singular sides on one span, non-smooth or inconsistent
normal cones, status-2 surfaces, incomplete ownership, workspace overflow, or
any unexcluded deflated root fail closed to the established path.

The implementation adds no ray-time allocation, random perturbation, mutable
global state, or SurfaceTree dependency.  Fixed trace workspaces record each
singular span, all line/collapse/exclusion/determinant stages, ownership,
normal agreement, and final pole events.  Singular events carry their
qualified normal explicitly so hit construction never reevaluates an
arbitrary UV pole normal.  Prepared face/span metadata is rebuilt after cache
deserialization, so this nonserialized addition does not require a cache
version change.

The focused --pole-only C/C++ corpus covers base north and south pole lines,
an inside-to-pole line, a radius-0.01 translated sphere, and a radius-10000
sphere translated to million-scale coordinates.  It requires prepared-path
selection, all eight sphere spans to pass every deflation stage, exactly two
owned singular events, no ordinary subdivision boxes or local roots, correct
analytic distances, and finite outward normals.  CTest runs it at SurfaceTree
depth two, the clearest former failure.  It passes independently at every
depth zero through eight; at depth zero the three BREP fixtures have only
three SurfaceTree nodes total.  The full directed suite now passes at depth
two.  All fifteen optimized default-depth rt_brep_ray shards pass, including
the seam, defect, contact/trim, grazing, paired Crofton, and interval gates.
ASAN/UBSAN pole runs at depths zero and two pass with leak scanning disabled
and halt-on-error enabled.

Do not reduce the production SurfaceTree default yet.  The next independent
reduced-depth work remains the RCC/cone/torus paired-Crofton grazing misses and
four transformed seam cases previously observed at depth two.  General mixed
pole/regular event authority and an interval-certified limiting-normal cone
are later extensions; the current complete-line theorem intentionally does
not claim them.

2026-08-09 ACTIVE CERTIFIED REGULAR-ROOT-PAIR CHECKPOINT

The controlled SurfaceTree measurement increment is committed locally as
ad9cc18119, "Measure controlled BREP SurfaceTree depth".  It was not pushed.
This checkpoint's increment, "Certify close BREP regular root pairs", closes
the exact depth-six grazing gap identified by that experiment.  It is also a
local-only commit and was not pushed.  The production SurfaceTree default
remains eight and the cache format remains version zero.

The ordinary physical-event dispatcher previously required each terminal box
to have one Krawczyk-certified root and one determinant sign.  The newer
component theorem was reachable only as cleanup around an exact edge event.
Consequently a near-tangent sphere ray could have two correct, independently
converged ENTER/LEAVE roots in one face/span and still publish no event: all
three coarse boxes were unresolved, while the sparse legacy fallback retained
only one hit.

A new regular/regular theorem handles this case before the fold dispatcher.
Its first production scope is deliberately narrow.  It requires exactly two
finite, non-grazing CLEAN_HIT observations on one face and Bezier span, with
opposite directions and ray-parameter separation strictly greater than the
BRL-CAD minimum segment tolerance plus scale-aware roundoff.  It owns the
entire shot's terminal-box ledger; every box must belong to that face/span and
must either observe one of the roots or be an unresolved rootless box.  It is
not used for status-2 reparameterized surfaces, exact tangency, minimum-size
contacts, trim-near roots, or a ray with additional components.

The two roots receive independent local certificates with radii smaller than
0.2 times their normalized L-infinity separation.  Their boxes are therefore
disjoint.  The complete rectangle spanning all terminal boxes is then split
at both local-box boundaries, and direct/rotated Bernstein bounds exclude
every remaining part with the existing fixed 64-entry stack, depth-24 limit,
and 8192-visit cap.  Stored terminal boxes need not touch: an earlier certified
exclusion may omit the root-free gap between them, and this theorem re-proves
that gap over the complete hull rather than trusting the omission.

Each root then receives a smaller nested event box which independently passes
coefficient restriction, strict Krawczyk inclusion, constant determinant
sign, outward t enclosure, face-reversal direction agreement, and the
minimum-segment gap classification.  The whole transaction is committed only
after both roots, every box, the complement, and the ordered ENTER/LEAVE stream
pass.  Component boxes receive a distinct RESOLVED_REGULAR_PAIR disposition
with no single determinant sign, since the two roots necessarily have
opposite signs.  New telemetry records attempts, certificates, owned boxes and
roots, complement visits/high-water, and a bounded failure stage.  No ray-time
allocation, random perturbation, or mutable global state was added.

The sphere/torus grazing gate now passes at every controlled SurfaceTree depth
from six through zero.  At depth zero the sphere's six formerly missing
material rays certify six root-pair components owning 18 boxes; complement
proofs visit 254 boxes in aggregate with stack high-water nine.  All eight
resolved sphere lines are selected by the prepared production pipeline.  The
exact tangent remains a miss/contact observation, the chord exactly equal to
T retains its conservative boundary fallback, all mirrored outside rays
remain misses, and the status-2 torus similarity path is unchanged.

Broader depth-two probing now identifies the next independent work rather
than another grazing-pair defect.  Endpoint, non-isoparametric, contact/trim,
affine, isolated-defect, and the focused grazing gates pass.  The directed
gate exposes sphere-pole behavior; Crofton finds small grazing misses on RCC,
cone, and torus conversions; and four seam transform cases still depend on
denser legacy leaves.  Pole behavior is especially diagnostic and
non-monotonic: the directed suite misses poles at depth two, passes at depth
three, returns geometrically wrong pole normals at depth four, misses the
large translated pole at depths five and six, and passed at depth seven in
the preceding checkpoint.  This confirms that selecting a lucky tree depth
is not a sound solution.  The next theorem/test corpus should explicitly own
degenerate parameter-space pole events and reconstruct their geometric normal
independently of the arbitrary UV representative.

All eleven optimized default-depth shards pass in the final state.  During
validation an initially broad dispatch screen intercepted 198 two-observation
Cobb seam rays before rejecting their different-face roots; narrowing the
screen to the theorem's exact same-face/span, clean-root, compatible-box domain
restored the established edge/seam paths.  The complete seam shard then passes
and reports zero regular-pair attempts for the Cobb matrix.  ASAN/UBSAN grazing
and isolated-defect gates pass at depth zero with leak scanning disabled and
halt-on-error enabled; neither reports a sanitizer diagnostic.  Do not change
the default based on the new grazing result alone.  The pole,
primitive-Crofton, and transformed seam gaps must first move onto certified
prepared paths and the broad matrix must pass at a common reduced depth.


2026-08-09 ACTIVE CONTROLLED SURFACETREE-DENSITY CHECKPOINT

The tolerance-healed edge-transition increment is committed locally as
e67336b607, "Certify tolerance-healed BREP edge transitions".  It was not
pushed.  The current uncommitted increment adds measurement and per-rt_i
control of BREP SurfaceTree construction depth.  It deliberately leaves the
production default at BREP_MAX_FT_DEPTH, currently eight, and does not change
the version-zero cache payload.

The control is an rt_i property rather than an environment variable or
mutable library global.  _rt_brep_set_surface_tree_depth accepts depths zero
through eight before prep, and each rt_brep_prep passes that immutable choice
to brep_build_bvh.  The resulting brep_specific records the requested limit,
observed maximum BBNode depth, SurfaceTree node and leaf counts, CurveTree
count and leaf count, and SurfaceTree construction time.  Cache version zero
can report the deserialized hierarchy sizes but reports the requested depth
as unknown, because that fact was not stored by the old format.  Any eventual
production-default or cache-layout change must bump or explicitly migrate the
cache version.

rt_brep_ray accepts --surface-tree-depth=0..8 with any focused mode and prints
aggregate prep measurements at process exit.  Direct test solids and in-memory
database models use the same per-instance control; no shot-time allocation or
thread-global setting was introduced.  brep-audit accepts
--surface-tree-depth with --surface-trees-only and includes the requested and
observed depths plus total/per-face node counts in its serial profile.  A
compile-time assertion prevents the librt test default from silently
disagreeing with libbrep's BREP_MAX_FT_DEPTH.

The isolated Cobb trim/edge defect gate passes unchanged at every controlled
depth from eight through zero.  At all nine levels it selects all 96 material
rays, deliberately falls back for the same 24 exact contacts, publishes the
same two tolerance-healed transitions, and has the same 2.02e-8 maximum
endpoint error.  Its nine-solid prep measurements are:

  limit   BBNodes   leaves   SurfaceTree seconds
    8      136566    68796          0.308134
    7       68094    34560          0.155170
    6       33534    17280          0.077380
    5       16254     8640          0.035225
    4        7614     4320          0.021501
    3        3294     2160          0.011600
    2        1134      864          0.008249
    1         270      216          0.006677
    0          54       54          0.006135

The 54 CurveTrees and 221 CurveTree leaves are unchanged.  This proves that
the new certified seam/trim component path does not depend on dense initial
surface boxes for this deliberately defective corpus.  At the time of this
measurement, observed BBNode depth could exceed a requested nonzero limit
because knot splits consumed part of the same recursion counter before
adaptive recursion restarted; for example, some limit-seven models reached
depth nine.  However, the termination check still preceded the knot
predicate, so a sufficiently small limit could truncate structural
decomposition.  The newer structural-knot increment above fixes that
semantic defect.  Treat this table as a historical measurement of the
one-span Cobb fixtures, not as proof that the old implementation always
exhausted arbitrary surface knots.

The broader experiments locate a concrete current boundary:

  * non-isoparametric and contact/trim gates pass at limit zero;
  * the complete affine and affine-grazing gate passes at limit two;
  * limits zero through six fail the same six material near-grazing sphere
    rays, at h/T ratios 10, 2, and 1.1 in both directions;
  * limit seven passes the complete sphere and torus grazing/status-2 gate.

For those six limit-six failures, the prepared path finds the two correct
opposite-direction local roots in three coarse boxes.  They occupy one
connected face/span component, however, so the existing single-regular-root
theorem cannot exclude the component complement.  No complete physical event
transaction is published, and the conservative whole-ray fallback sees only
one root in the sparse legacy leaves.  The correct next step is a bounded
same-face two-regular-root theorem: independently contract disjoint root
neighborhoods, prove determinant direction and outward t enclosure for each,
and exclude the remainder of the shared hull before atomically publishing the
ENTER/LEAVE pair.  Simply lowering the default to seven would preserve this
known proof gap and is not yet justified.

At limit seven, the directed correctness shard passes with 13 BREP preps and
203149/108055 BBNodes/leaves.  The paired Cauchy-Crofton gate passes 128000
identical implicit/BREP lines across the sphere, ellipsoid, box, cylinder,
cone, torus, CSG unions/intersections/subtractions, transformed nested sphere
shell, and sewn Cobb sphere with zero differing lines.  Maximum endpoint
error is 1.07e-7; the aggregate estimates and checkpoint confidence intervals
also agree.  Endpoint, non-isoparametric, contact/trim, affine, defect, and
grazing shards pass at limit seven.  The long comprehensive seam shard also
passes with 78 BREP preps, 560493/285828 BBNodes/leaves, and all classifier,
vertex, crack, isolated-defect, and transform ratchets unchanged.

A brep-audit smoke comparison on the 462-face Product_step18_item.s from
step_corpus_g/non_grabcad/0353/0353-00-24.g validates the same measurement path
on imported geometry.  Limit eight reports 123919/62451 nodes/leaves, maximum
depth ten, 2.51 seconds, and 59.4 MB peak RSS.  Limit seven reports
66943/33985, maximum depth nine, 1.43 seconds, and 48.0 MB peak RSS.  The 13060
CurveTree leaves are unchanged.  This single-object result is evidence that
the synthetic reduction is relevant, but it is not yet a corpus-wide timing
or memory claim.  The ASAN/UBSAN defect and grazing gates both pass at limit
seven with leak scanning disabled and halt-on-error enabled; neither reports
a sanitizer diagnostic.

There is no sign that the intended solution is failing to converge.  Sparse
tree failures have become smaller and more classifiable as local proof
coverage grows.  Exact tangency is necessarily a topological transition from
two crossings to one contact to a miss, so the contract is stable
tolerance-relative classification and monotone limiting behavior, not a
continuous raw hit count at the singular point.  The tractable target is
valid and tolerance-healable solid BREPs.  Arbitrarily defective topology or
singular parametrizations cannot be assigned a unique solid meaning without
an explicit policy and remain bounded-fallback cases.


2026-08-09 ACTIVE TOLERANCE-HEALED EDGE TRANSITION CHECKPOINT

The preceding certified-component increment is committed locally as
1ae947e957, "Certify local BREP seam root components".  It was not pushed.
The current uncommitted increment classifies and resolves all six material
trim-only Cobb fallbacks that remained at that checkpoint.  SurfaceTree
density, cache data, and allocation behavior are still unchanged.

Four cases were rejected at the edge-candidate entry point.  Their angular
edge-sector states were finite and opposite, and their actual incident
surface roots were non-grazing, but line_state_valid was also conditioned on
the fixed BREP_GRAZING_DOT_TOL applied to a face normal evaluated at a
displaced trim-frame lift.  That mixed a topological wedge question with a
conditioning estimate from a discrepant location.  line_state_valid now
depends only on the nonzero angular wedge states.  This does not publish a hit
by itself: the complete incident root/box transaction still requires finite,
non-grazing surface roots, exact represented-edge authorization, and the
applicable local component theorem.

The other two cases are the g/T=0.9, chord/T=1.1, inward trim-bow rays in both
directions.  The literal displaced trim frame says contact on both sides, but
the complete incident root set has one root on each face and every root gives
the same ENTER or LEAVE direction.  A nearby opposite regular root lies more
than T away and shares the same coarse terminal component.  The edge
candidate may now record this as a provisional tolerance-healed transition,
but only under all of these conditions:

  * prep established the strict edge correspondence and discrepancy envelope;
  * the ray has an exact represented-edge witness rather than a near-edge snap;
  * both incident faces contribute complete, finite, non-grazing root/box
    observations with one common crossing direction;
  * no selected root or box conflicts with another candidate; and
  * the joint boundary/regular theorem contracts both local roots, excludes
    the complete remainder of their connected hull, certifies the boundary
    box's determinant sign, applies face reversal, and agrees with the
    proposed crossing direction.

The transition remains unpublished if any joint precondition or proof fails.
Promoted boxes receive RESOLVED_BOUNDARY rather than RESOLVED_CONTACT.  New
trace fields record edge-candidate failure stages and the count of successfully
published tolerance transitions, so later changes cannot silently broaden
this policy.

The isolated defect ratchet now has 96 prepared selections and 24 explicit
UNCERTIFIED fallbacks.  Trim-only selects 32/40 and edge-only selects 64/80.
Thus every one of the 96 material rays is handled by the prepared production
pipeline; the only fallbacks are the 24 exact zero-length contacts.  The
matrix publishes 36 ordinary regular components, 60 joint edge/regular
components, 64 common-lift exact witnesses, and two tolerance-healed
transitions.  Its fixed complement stacks visit 1,068 boxes in aggregate and
reach high-water four.  Maximum endpoint error is 2.02e-8 and maximum relative
defect calibration error is 9.32e-6.

A separate transform-invariance gate replays the newly healed transition in
both ray directions after arbitrary rotation and translation at scales 0.01,
1, and 10,000.  All six rays require exact discrepancy authorization, one
joint component, one published edge transition, the tolerance-transition
marker, a valid directed material interval, and prepared-production
selection.  All pass.  The worst endpoint error normalized back to base model
units is 6.22e-9.

Optimized verification for this production state:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --defect-only
  ctest --test-dir .build -j8 --output-on-failure -R
    '^(rt_brep_ray|rt_brep_ray_(crofton|seam|endpoint|
    nonisoparametric|contact_trim|defect|interval|grazing_root|fold|
    affine))$'

All eleven CTest shards pass.  The comprehensive seam shard took 225.66
seconds and the parallel batch took 225.71 seconds.  The ASAN/UBSAN
--defect-only run, including the six similarity rays, also passes with
detect_leaks=0 and halt-on-error enabled and no sanitizer diagnostic.

There is still no evidence of an uncontrolled or non-convergent numerical
search.  Each remaining material failure reduced to a finite, observable
classification or proof-authority gap, and the ratchet improved from 0/120 to
96/120 without changing any analytic interval.  The tractable engineering
target is a certified common path plus an explicit bounded fallback for true
degeneracies, not unconditional success on every singular parametrization.
The next production task is to profile and reduce initial SurfaceTree density
one level at a time, preserving the directed, grazing, seam, transform, and
paired Cauchy-Crofton gates at every step.


2026-08-09 CERTIFIED SEAM/REGULAR COMPONENT CHECKPOINT

The isolated Cobb defect corpus is committed locally as 6afabb5efd, "Add
isolated Cobb trim and edge defects".  The certified component increment is
this checkpoint's local commit, "Certify local BREP seam root components".
Neither was pushed.  The latter replaces most of the corpus's deliberately
recorded whole-ray fallbacks with fixed-workspace proofs.  SurfaceTree density
and cache format are unchanged.

The first new theorem owns a connected many-boxes-to-one-root component on one
face and Bezier span.  Seed boxes must match immutable numerical observations
of one regular root and have a regular or unresolved disposition.  Rootless
unresolved boxes may join only by UV/t adjacency.  The complete component hull
is restricted with outward coefficient error and accepted either by one
strict Krawczyk inclusion or by a smaller expansion-valued contraction box
whose entire hull complement is excluded by direct/rotated Bernstein bounds.
A constant determinant sign and outward ray-parameter interval are then
certified before any box disposition or physical event is committed.

The exact manifold-edge theorem now also accepts a displaced 3-D edge only
when both independently evaluated incident trim lifts coincide with each
other and with the represented ray to coordinate roundoff.  Both lifts must
remain inside the edge discrepancy tolerance established by the prep-time
global correspondence and strict gap-bound proof.  This does not move a
merely near ray onto an edge.  It supplies a topologically exact witness for
the isolated edge-only Cobb variants, whose surface seam and trims agree but
whose 3-D edge curve is bowed by less than T.  A CLEAN_MISS surface observation
may participate only when trim classification explicitly says it is within
the authorized near-trim band; arbitrary outside roots remain ineligible.

The difficult close-graze case contains two physical roots in the same coarse
terminal boxes: one exact seam/edge root and one nearby regular root of the
opposite direction.  A joint theorem now collects the complete connected
component and independently contracts both roots.  Each ownership box is at
most 0.2 times their normalized L-infinity separation, so the two certified
neighborhoods are disjoint.  The contraction routine retains the largest
successfully certified neighborhood for complement ownership.  A generalized
fixed-stack complement walk aligns subdivisions to both local boxes and proves
that there is no third root.  The regular event then uses the smallest nested
box which independently passes coefficient restriction, strict Krawczyk
inclusion, constant determinant sign, duplicate-observation containment, and
outward t enclosure.  The boundary event uses only the exact topological
witness's roundoff t interval.  This separation of wide ownership from tight
event enclosure is necessary: tiny boxes can be dominated by restriction
roundoff, while the widest unique-root box may produce overlapping event
intervals.

All new ray-time arrays are fixed capacity.  The complement walk has a
64-entry stack, a depth-24 limit, and an 8,192-box visit limit.  On the current
positive matrix it visits 954 boxes in aggregate and reaches stack high-water
four.  No allocation, random perturbation, or mutable global surface state was
introduced.

The isolated defect ratchet now passes with 90 prepared selections and 30
explicit UNCERTIFIED fallbacks, improved from the original 0/120 baseline and
the intermediate 36/84 regular-component checkpoint.  Trim-only selects 26 of
40 rays; edge-only selects 64 of 80.  All 64 material edge-only rays use the
common-lift exact witness.  The proofs publish 36 ordinary regular components
and 54 joint edge/regular components.  All 24 exact-contact rays continue to
fall back deliberately, leaving only six material trim-only fallbacks.  Two of
those reach but fail the joint preconditions; four do not yet form an exact
edge candidate.  Every final interval still matches the analytic sphere and
implicit ELL oracle.  Maximum endpoint error is 4.78e-8 and maximum relative
defect calibration error is 9.32e-6.

Focused optimized verification completed so far:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --defect-only
  ctest --test-dir .build -j8 --output-on-failure -R
    '^(rt_brep_ray_(defect|grazing_root|affine|crofton|seam|local_root|
    source_union|trim_interval|interval))$'

All nine shards pass.  The comprehensive seam sweep took 199.93 seconds and
the whole parallel batch took 199.98 seconds, demonstrating that independent
test-process parallelism captures essentially all of the shorter shards'
wall-clock cost.  The final ASAN/UBSAN defect run also passes with
detect_leaks=0 and halt-on-error enabled, with no sanitizer diagnostic.  Leak
scanning remains disabled for the previously documented host ptrace-wrapper
reason.

This result strengthens the tractability assessment.  The observed failure
was a finite proof-partition problem rather than uncontrolled iteration: the
first complement failed after only 41--46 visits, wider certified ownership
boxes moved it past that stage, and separating ownership from event enclosure
raised prepared selection monotonically to 90/120 without changing the final
oracle answer.  The next local task is to classify the six material trim-only
fallbacks.  The broader next task remains reducing initial SurfaceTree density
and measuring when these bounded on-demand proofs can replace its deepest
levels.


2026-08-09 ACTIVE ISOLATED TRIM/EDGE DEFECT CHECKPOINT

The nested CSG-leaf increment is committed locally as e60c0fbcc7, "Test
nested transformed BREP-leaf CSG".  It was not pushed.  The current increment
adds the first independently isolated trim-only and edge-only Cobb
representations and registers them as the parallel rt_brep_ray_defect CTest
shard.

The trim-only generator leaves all six rational sphere surfaces and the shared
3-D edge fixed, bows only one incident 2-D trim toward its face interior, and
records the independently measured U/V displacement in the corresponding
anisotropic ON_BrepTrim tolerance fields.  Because the pristine Cobb face uses
its natural surface boundary, the opposite bow would leave the valid surface
domain; this first valid-model matrix therefore covers the inward trim sign.
The edge-only generator leaves both surface lifts and both trims fixed, copies
the shared rational edge curve, and bows only its interior control points
radially inward or outward while preserving its endpoints and weights.  Both
generators calibrate the maximum 3-D edge/lift discrepancy by dense sampling,
preserve roundoff-level surface radial error, and set the target edge's
declared tolerance to the unchanged model T only after calibration.

The ray geometry was corrected during development.  A line centered under the
seam by h has roots O(sqrt(R*h)) away from the seam and primarily tests generic
grazing isolation.  It does not isolate a sub-T seam defect.  The permanent
fixture instead fixes one analytic sphere endpoint exactly at the target seam
midpoint.  If the desired chord is L, it chooses a unit conormal/radial
direction D satisfying N dot D = -L/(2R), so the other endpoint is P+L*D.
The expected directed interval is exactly [2R,2R+L].  It uses L/T = 100, 10,
2, and 1.1 plus exact contact L=0, both conormal signs, and ray reversal.

The complete valid-model matrix has g/T = 0.25 and 0.9: 40 trim-only rays and
80 edge-only rays, 120 total including 24 exact contacts.  Every final BREP
answer matches the analytic sphere and the implicit ELL oracle; maximum BREP
endpoint error is 7.08e-8.  The discrepancy calibration error is at most
9.32e-6 relative.  All strict prep-time correspondence, endpoint, and gap
bounds pass.  The baseline deliberately records zero prepared selections and
120 explicit UNCERTIFIED whole-ray fallbacks, so a later theorem can ratchet
that count upward without hiding a final-answer regression.

The failure population is localized.  Trim-only rays invoke the exact
manifold-edge resolver 40 times but form no publishable candidate because the
surface terminal boxes at the seam endpoint are still unresolved.  Edge-only
rays cannot use an exact edge witness after the 3-D edge locus moves; they make
80 seam attempts with 192 eligible local-root observations, all conservatively
falling back.  A representative 100T chord has three local observations at
the seam endpoint (one trim miss and one tolerance-near incident-face hit) and
the second material endpoint, with six terminal boxes.  Boxes duplicate about
the surface subdivision boundary v=0.5 and have neither Krawczyk orientation
nor a complete fold certificate.  This identifies the next authority needed:
a bounded component/root theorem which can own all duplicate terminal boxes,
certify orientation and trim/edge containment, and publish the seam endpoint
transactionally.  Merely loosening hit cleanup or proximity tests is not an
acceptable fix.

Verified so far in this increment:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --defect-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --nonisoparametric-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --contact-trim-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --seam-only
  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
    .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --defect-only

All pass with no sanitizer diagnostic.  The full optimized --seam-only shard
also passes, including the preceding 416-ray bowed, non-isoparametric,
contact-trim, endpoint/vertex, and tolerance-policy matrices followed by this
new defect corpus.  Leak scanning remains disabled for the documented host
ptrace-wrapper reason.  No SurfaceTree density, cache format, or production
ray logic has changed in this increment.


2026-08-09 ACTIVE NESTED CSG-LEAF CHECKPOINT

The status-2 similarity increment is committed locally as 8fea341aa0,
"Qualify status-2 grazing under similarities".  It was not pushed.  The
current increment extends the topology-identical implicit-leaf versus
BREP-leaf CSG oracle in src/librt/tests/brep_ray.cpp.

The new in-memory fixture preserves one nested Boolean tree in both models:

  oracle.r = (outer.s translated -8 union outer.s translated +8)
             subtract (inner.s translated -8)

outer.s is one reused radius-5 sphere definition and inner.s is a radius-2
sphere.  One model exports the original ELL leaves; the other replaces those
same definitions with their exact ft_brep conversions before applying the
identical member matrices and Boolean operators.  It therefore tests a reused
transformed BREP leaf, a non-region nested union combination, subtraction,
an internal cavity, two disconnected material components, and three ordered
partitions on one ray without conflating those checks with evaluated
region-to-one-BREP conversion.

The independent analytic oracles are:

  area   = 2(4*pi*5^2) + 4*pi*2^2 = 216*pi
  volume = 2(4*pi*5^3/3) - 4*pi*2^3/3 = (968/3)*pi
  bounds = [-13,-5,-5] through [13,5,5]

Four directed rays require the exact forward three-interval partition, its
reverse, the left shell's two intervals, and the right solid's one interval.
The shared fixed-seed Cauchy-Crofton run then shoots 8,000 identical lines
through the implicit and BREP-leaf hierarchies.  It passes with zero differing
lines, zero tangent-band exceptions, maximum paired endpoint error 3.84e-8,
signed total chord difference 5.80e-6, and absolute total chord difference
6.88e-6.  At 8,000 lines both representations estimate area 697.640914
(standard error 15.1) and volume 1059.37503 (standard error 23.5), within the
predeclared confidence bands around 216*pi and (968/3)*pi.  Equality of the
paired estimates is not accepted in place of the analytic gate; both are
checked independently.

Verified in this increment:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --crofton-only

Both pass.  The cache-object warnings printed during the run are the known
pre-existing cache diagnostic and do not fail the suite.  The fixture's
in-memory database ownership was inspected and git diff --check passes.  The
next hierarchy tier is the reverse BREP-to-CSG recognizer qualification;
additional thin-wall and near-coincident hierarchy cases remain tolerance
policy work and must not be folded into this nondegenerate baseline.


2026-08-09 ACTIVE STATUS-2 SIMILARITY CHECKPOINT

The preceding grazing increment is committed locally as 14d4c7c65a,
"Resolve status-2 BREP grazing roots locally".  The similarity increment
described below was subsequently committed as 8fea341aa0, "Qualify status-2
grazing under similarities".  Neither commit was pushed.

The new matrix transforms the difficult status-2 torus tube section by an
arbitrary rotation plus translation at scales 1, 0.01, and 10,000.  It scales
the model tolerance with the geometry and shoots the 2T and 1.1T chords in
both directions.  All 12 rays now require one analytic BREP interval, status-2
mapping, selected prepared production events, exact expansion availability,
rigorous exclusion, bounded refinement, and no arithmetic or workspace
exhaustion.  The matrix passes with all 12 selected.  Maximum normalized BREP
endpoint error is 1.34e-5 model units; maximum refinement/high-water is 17/15,
well below the fixed 64-refinement and expansion capacities.

The test exposed two distinct transform effects.  First, the implicit TOR
quartic returns two segments rather than the one analytic normal-section
interval on all four large-scale cases.  These are recorded as four implicit
artifacts; the analytic circle remains the boundary oracle.  Second, the
large 1.1T status-2 BREP reaches one regular box plus one complete fold box.
Its conservative box intervals prove a strict gap greater than T, but optional
nested fold-localization attempts report some failed levels.  The mixed
fold/regular eligibility check previously treated any failed optional level as
a failed theorem and fell back.  It now consumes the actual stored fold
interval (either the best certified contraction or the complete parent box)
and lets the existing strict outward gap proof decide.  This is conservative
and restores similarity invariance; localization failures remain telemetry.

Verified after this change:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --grazing-root-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --fold-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --directed-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --affine-only

All pass.  The directed partition includes the new status-2 transform matrix
and the existing status-1 sphere similarity matrix.  Before the next commit,
run git diff --check and review the focused diff for cleanup and ownership.


2026-08-09 ACTIVE GRAZING CHECKPOINT

The current uncommitted checkpoint adds a rational torus normal-section
ratchet and the first production use of bounded, on-demand exact refinement.
The authoritative modified files are src/librt/librt_private.h,
src/librt/primitives/brep/brep.cpp, src/librt/primitives/brep/brep_local.h,
and src/librt/tests/brep_ray.cpp.  Inspect git status and diff before resuming;
do not discard this work.

The full torus conversion is an ON_RevSurface.  Its GetNurbForm return value is
2, meaning the converted NURBS has the same locus but a nonidentity parameter
map.  The prepared-span builder now accepts status 2 and records the status per
face.  Solver boxes and certificates remain in NURBS parameter space.  Final
root points are mapped with GetSurfaceParameterFromNurbFormParameter, checked
by the inverse map and by model-space point agreement, then classified against
the original face's normal and trims.  Published hit UV is in original-surface
space.  Status-2 seam, edge, and vertex publication still fails closed because
there is not yet an interval enclosure for that parameter map; only clean
interior regular or complete fold events may publish.

The torus ratchet uses two analytic circular normal sections away from seams:
the tube circle and a major-direction circle.  It shoots both ray directions
at chord lengths 100T, 10T, 2T, 1.1T, 1T, 0.9T, 0.5T, 0.1T, and 0.01T, where T
is the model minimum distance.  The analytic circle is authoritative at the
boundary.  All 100T, 10T, 2T, and 1.1T cases now publish the correct full-solid
BREP interval in both directions.  Exactly 1T is deliberately classified
ambiguous by the certified event stream and falls back: legacy returns a
tolerance-sized segment for the sphere and torus major section but no segment
for the torus tube section.  Below T no prepared material interval publishes.
Exact tangency has contact roots but no prepared material interval, and all
analytic outside cases have no BREP material interval.

The improvement is local and allocation-free; SurfaceTree density is
unchanged.  Ordinary isolation still has its depth-24 budget.  At this
checkpoint the extra tier is enabled only for status-2 faces, whose production
gate already permits clean interior regular/fold events and rejects seam,
edge, and vertex publication.  A terminal status-2 box which remains
unresolved uses the exact per-coefficient expansion intervals already prepared
for the ray/surface equations.  It applies direct
and conditioned/rotated Bernstein hull exclusion and a tight expansion
Krawczyk attempt.  If the exact rotated hull retains the box, a fixed local
refinement may split it for at most eight additional per-box levels and 64
total per-ray refinements.  A certified regular box reached through this path
is refined further when its ray-parameter interval exceeds 0.01T, so two roots
only 1.1T apart can still prove a strictly resolved outward gap.  All work uses
the existing 64-entry stack and fixed coefficient arrays; there is no malloc
in the ray path.  At the 2T torus tube case the exact rotated hull eliminates
the spurious middle/far box that the worst-common-error representation could
not separate.  At 1.1T further local splits isolate two signed Krawczyk boxes
whose outward t gap exceeds T.

An experimental theorem which joined the opposite root box with a connected
rootless box was removed.  Component ownership succeeded, but both ordinary
and expansion-valued Krawczyk correctly refused the union because it included
the singular fold neighborhood.  It certified no controlled positive case
and would only have added production cost.  The narrower two-box mixed
fold/regular theorem remains: it resolves the previously observed 10T case
when one complete fold parent and one regular parent own the two roots.

The dense legacy SurfaceTree path on the original tube-direction torus case
visits 24 leaves and returns only one of the two physical roots in either ray
direction, hence no solid segment.  This confirms that the problem is missing
root isolation, not later hit cleanup.  The new prepared path now supplies the
analytic interval above T without changing the tree.

The implicit TOR quartic is not a trustworthy boundary oracle: this fixture
currently observes one false tolerance-sized segment on each exact tangent
and 16 false outside segments across the 18 directed outside samples for each
normal-section family.  These are recorded telemetry.  Positive-clearance
implicit endpoints still match the analytic section.  The analytic circle,
not the implicit quartic near zero clearance, gates BREP correctness.

Verified at this checkpoint:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --grazing-root-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --interval-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --fold-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --seam-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --nonisoparametric-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --contact-trim-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --directed-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --affine-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --endpoint-only
  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --crofton-only
  cmake --build .build --target brep-audit -j8

All of those commands pass.  They are the independently runnable partitions
of the current corpus and include the pole, transformed-similarity, affine,
seam/crack, endpoint, CSG-leaf, and shared-line Crofton gates.  A first
unpartitioned run was stopped after diagnosing the now-fixed status-1 box-
ownership regression; it must not be cited as a completed full run.  The
independent partitions were rerun after the status-2 gate was installed.

The torus test now traces every above-tolerance full BREP result rather than
accepting a legacy success.  Both normal-section families require all eight
100T/10T/2T/1.1T directed cases to select the prepared production stream with
one complete physical material interval.  The four tube-section 2T/1.1T cases
also require exact expansion availability, exclusion, and refinement with no
arithmetic failure or budget exhaustion.  Fold roots now receive the same
status-2 3D locus-agreement test already required of regular roots.  A regular
Krawczyk box is locally refined even when it certifies before the ordinary
depth limit if its ray interval remains wider than 0.01T; the eight-level and
64-refinement limits still bound all work.

Before committing, rerun the independent partitions after the final code
audit, retain the GetNurbForm corpus telemetry below, and decide whether a
dedicated transformed-similarity matrix for the status-2 torus belongs in this
increment or the next one.  Existing sphere and ellipsoid tests already cover
translation, rotation, 0.01x/10,000x uniform scale, and nonuniform affine
conditioning, but they use status-1 surface forms.

A first attempt enabled exact terminal refinement on every supported face.
The full run correctly exposed that as too broad: it repartitioned status-1
Cobb seam and vertex source boxes, invalidating their existing atomic ownership
theorems even though legacy final answers remained correct.  The run was
stopped after the repeated failure pattern was established.  The implementation
now enables the new tier only for status-2 faces.  This is aligned with the
current point-map publication theorem (clean interior regular/fold only), and
preserves every established status-1 seam/edge/vertex transaction.  After this
gate was added, --seam-only, --nonisoparametric-only, and --contact-trim-only
all pass again; the 416-ray Cobb matrix reports zero regressions.  Do not expand
the tier to status-1 boundary topology without dedicated box-repartition
invariance tests and an updated ownership theorem.

The GetNurbForm telemetry is now implemented in src/gtools/brep-audit.cpp and
the brep-audit target builds.  A real STEP-corpus sample gives a strong reason
to retain status-2 support:

  brep-audit --surface-trees-only \
    /home/cyapp/step_corpus_g/non_grabcad/0353/0353-10-12.g \
    Product_step46_item.s

This 175-face object reports 33 exact/status-1 forms, 142 reparameterized/
status-2 forms, no unavailable/other forms, 98,758 SurfaceTree leaves, and a
4,096-leaf maximum face.  Thus the prior status==1 prepared-span gate excluded
81.1 percent of the faces in this representative revolved STEP model even
though all have convertible NURBS loci.  The per-face JSON now records
nurb_form_status and the object summary records unavailable, exact,
reparameterized, and other counts.


Phase 1 ownership repair and the first deterministic Newton hardening pass are
implemented.  Directed implicit-sphere/converted-BREP pole rays now pass.  An
in-memory C++ ray corpus and signed grazing report are in place.  The initial
report exposed a repeatable false-interval plateau at tangency; conditioned
root acceptance now removes that plateau and all sampled outside false hits,
and those cases are permanent gates.  A shared-line Crofton harness now
compares final implicit and BREP partitions on identical samples for sphere,
oblate ellipsoid, ARB8 box, RCC, truncated cone, and torus fixtures.  Surface-
tree density has not yet changed; the qualified seam behavior is described
below.  Five topology-identical CSG regions now compare implicit leaves
against individually converted BREP
leaves under the same Boolean trees.  A reusable exact Cobb sphere definition
now supplies both the legacy unsewn patch set and a closed 8-vertex/12-edge
solid; the pristine sewn form matches the implicit sphere on its first 8,000
shared lines.  An endpoint-preserving bowed support-seam sweep now calibrates
actual 3D discrepancy and records grazing behavior across 416 directed rays.
It retains 14 reproducible legacy one-event crack cases and now repairs all 14
in production without closing any g > T, contact, or exterior case.  Fixed-
capacity raw-shot tracing now distinguishes missing physical
roots from trim rejection and legacy hit cleanup without changing production
behavior.  Direct shared-edge observations also prove that every current
below-envelope leak has eligible 3D evidence on the intended mated edge.
Compact positive-weight rational Bezier spans and conservative control-hull
boxes for eligible edges are now prepared in both normal and cached prep.
An observation-only cross-section classifier validates incident trim lifts and
distinguishes material-side, contact, and exterior edge proximity.  A further
event classifier now identifies uniquely repairable unmatched solid hits from
that evidence and is invariant under tested similarities.  Edge-sector,
discrepancy, and continuation paths now resolve the corresponding incident
trim parameter geometrically instead of assuming equal normalized parameter
speed; an exact-locus Möbius trim-reparameterization fixture gates this
representation invariance.
Every supported two-trim edge with certified global correspondence now
receives a prep-time decision certificate for its geometric edge/lifted-trim
Hausdorff gap.  It is knot-aware, adaptive, similarity-gated, and bounded by a
solid-wide work budget.  Strict upper-inside bounds authorize production seam
evidence; strict lower-outside bounds reject it; equality-straddling,
unsupported, and budget-exhausted records remain explicit fallback.  The old
sampled authorization is telemetry only, including for exact-looking seams.
A dedicated paired seam theorem now consumes that authorized edge evidence in
the immutable physical-event ledger.  It publishes one bounded existing-root
event and one independently isolated outside-span continuation event only
when every retained surface box and local root is owned either by the existing
endpoint or by a tangent witness on the same edge corridor.  The edge itself
may be the sole witness only when every retained box/root belongs to the
existing endpoint.  The global {0,1} state machine and outward minimum-segment
classifier must then prove one ENTER/LEAVE material interval.  Sixteen
controlled Cobb rays now use this direct production stream: fourteen reproduce
the prior specialized crack repair and two replace a legacy endpoint error
with the implicit-sphere answer.  Extra non-tangent roots, overlap, contact,
unsupported topology, and any incomplete ownership retain whole-ray fallback.
A prep-time global correspondence theorem now withholds seam evidence unless
the rational 3D edge and both lifted trims are provably injective and
consistently oriented along one shared projection.  Exact rational control
signs cover isoparametric boundaries and sphere-pole endpoint stationarity;
other regular trims use outward derivative bounds and bounded subdivision.
The old sample screen is telemetry only.  A sample-invisible degree-15 trim
reversal permanently gates explicit fallback.  Closed manifold planar vertex
fans are now prepared as oriented cyclic links and exact vertex crossings are
classified by spherical winding.  Convex and reentrant fans publish immutable
events, including multiple vertex events and mixed regular events on one ray;
exact face-tangent, near-but-not-on-vertex, curved, disconnected, ambiguous,
unsupported, and capacity-limited fans retain whole-ray fallback.
Exact interior crossings of certified two-trim manifold edges now have their
own atomic event theorem.  A coordinate-roundoff ray/edge witness is required
before the authorized seam envelope may associate incident surface evidence.
The oriented cross-section publishes convex or reentrant ENTER/LEAVE events
and consumes unchanged-state CONTACT clusters without a transition.  Multiple
disjoint edge events, mixed edge/ordinary streams, duplicate Bezier-span
observations, and periodic same-surface seams are supported with complete
root/box ownership in both ray directions and across the qualified similarity
matrix.  A source box must enclose the exact topological ray parameter; model
tolerance cannot manufacture the witness.  Tolerance-near rays, arbitrary
gap/overlap clusters, sector-boundary tangency, non-manifold edges, and edge
endpoint neighborhoods remain explicit fallback or future theorems.
A separate tolerance-near seam-contact subtype now resolves the six known
inward bowed-Cobb incident-face lobes that formerly failed ownership.  Exactly
two clean non-tangent roots on the other incident face may be consumed as an
internal contact only when their terminal boxes contain the geometrically
mapped trim parameter and projected edge t, every root/box has one role, the
complete box t hull remains inside the oriented material sector, and the
outer existing/continuation pair independently forms the analytic solid
interval.  Distinct contact certificates and counters prevent confusion with
the older tangent-witness theorem.  The subtype is invariant in fourteen
directed identity, trim-reparameterized, translated, rotated, 0.01x, and
10,000x cases.  The 60-ray endpoint-moving Cobb family now has a separate
topological endpoint certificate: both oriented trim endpoints must name the
edge's exact vertices, and both edge and lifted-trim endpoints must satisfy
the corresponding vertex tolerance before they seed the complete discrepancy
partition.  All 60 target edges now receive strict INSIDE gap proofs.  Two
inward rays use the original seam theorem, eliminate the two prior below-
envelope leaks, and remain invariant under eight additional directed
translation/rotation/0.01x/10,000x cases.  This does not extend the two-root
contact-lobe subtype or authorize a vertex neighborhood.
Exact-parameter positive-weight surface spans and conservative ray-plane
coefficient exclusion are prepared, and a bounded adjacent-support
continuation solve recovers the missing bowed-seam endpoints.
Fixed-capacity de Casteljau subdivision now narrows ordinary span candidates
to conservative UV and ray-t boxes while reporting all workspace limits.
Bounded outside-span reparameterization now certifies the continuation root
and assembles an oracle-matching material interval in production.
Every retained ordinary surface box now also runs an allocation-free bounded
local corrector.  Its shadow roots reproduce the resolved sphere grazing
limit independently of SurfaceTree seeds and remain invariant across the
expanded similarity corpus.  A fixed preliminary same-face clustering stage
now exposes ordered enter/leave/contact behavior without changing production
events.  Trace mode now compares unique prepared-span and depth-eight legacy
Newton roots in both directions.  Prepared spans cover every physical legacy
root in the controlled sphere, bowed Cobb, and classifier-similarity matrices.
The remaining unmatched sphere clusters are explicitly gated legacy-only
numerical ambiguities on representable miss-side lines; analytic and final-
partition oracles classify all of them as misses.  Prepared roots are now also
classified
against the owned face-wide CurveTree without allocation.  Fixed event
clusters compare material/trim state, near/clean class, grazing-aware
direction, and meaningful near-edge adjacency against legacy clusters before
any SurfaceTree density change.  Trace mode now also materializes both raw
prepared candidates and canonical physical event clusters in fixed brep_hit
workspaces, observes all five legacy cleanup stages, independently runs the
certified crack repair, and records complete solid partitions.  The analytic
sphere partitions are equivalent; one bowed Cobb partition differs and the
prepared result is the one that matches the implicit sphere oracle.
Ordinary transverse prepared-span roots can now terminate subdivision
after a converged corrector passes a strict interval Krawczyk inclusion test.
Six oblique sphere rays preserve exact implicit/legacy/prepared partition
agreement while reducing visited boxes by about 71.7 percent from a measured
fixed-depth baseline.  Grazing and boundary roots do not qualify and retain
the conservative depth-24 path.  Its ordinary in-span arithmetic audit is now
complete.  Strictly qualified ordinary partitions now publish in production;
all incomplete, grazing, boundary, unsupported, and capacity-limited cases
retain the dense SurfaceTree fallback.
The same regular-root path is now gated under translation, arbitrary rotation,
and 0.01x/10,000x uniform scales with scaled model tolerances.  Thirty directed
rays preserve normalized analytic/implicit/legacy/prepared partitions and all
60 roots terminate adaptively at depths 4 through 11.  Work varies by
transform, as expected, without changing classification.
An independent nonuniform affine ellipsoid matrix now maps analytic sphere
chords through rotated principal scales and compares implicit, promoted,
forced-legacy, and reconstructed-prepared results.  All ordinary production
partitions remain oracle-equivalent through condition number 1,000.  After
conditioned equation-hull exclusion, the prepared path selects all 36 rays
with no fallback and visits 970 surface boxes in the complete matrix.
The same construction now sweeps 78 mapped grazing/contact/miss rays at
conditions 13.3, 100, and 1,000.  It proved that angular grazing deletion was
not affine invariant and now preserves tolerance-resolved ENTER/LEAVE pairs.
The trend is monotone and reversal-consistent, but six high-condition analytic
chords above the model tolerance still have no solver roots; they remain an
explicit capability gap rather than a claimed invariant.  Exact transformed
tangency also exposes three direction-dependent implicit ELL contact slivers,
so the analytic oracle is authoritative exactly at zero clearance.
Function and Jacobian enclosures now use outward interval operations throughout
rather than scalar evaluation plus an error estimate.  An independent exact-
dyadic gate covers all supported order pairs, five wide binary scales, positive
coefficient uncertainty, derivative hulls, interval products, initial
homogeneous coefficient construction, arbitrary sub-box restrictions,
positive-denominator quotients, and rational ray-t bounds.  Outside-span
reparameterization now also uses a directly applied outward interval tensor
operator and has an independent exact-dyadic audit.  The ordinary and
continuation arithmetic layers are complete.  Ordinary prepared isolation now
also applies conservative Bernstein convex-hull clipping before subdivision.
It retains at least half of each parameter width, charges clipping against the
depth budget according to retained area, and falls back to the unchanged box
on every inconclusive or inconsistent result.  Thirty similarity rays reduce
from the recorded 1,602-box no-clipping baseline to 964 boxes while preserving
all analytic, legacy, and prepared partitions.  Broad production promotion
now publishes only completely certified ordinary partitions; every other case
runs the unchanged dense SurfaceTree path.  Tree-density reduction remains
gated on fallback coverage and performance.
Production trim classification now scans the prepared trim leaves directly;
the former copied-list implementation remains trace-only as an exact
equivalence oracle.  The full traced corpus hard-gates candidate counts,
status, selected trim node, and distance.
Production raw-hit collection, stable sorting, and all legacy cleanup stages
now use a fixed 128-hit workspace.  Capacity overflow reruns the deterministic
solve into the legacy list before cleanup or segment publication; trace mode
keeps exact raw-order, per-stage, and final-event equivalence gates.
The localized real-fold path now combines the portable, fixed-size error-free
expansion tier with complete regular-graph endpoint existence and fold-strip
proofs for all twelve known hard real candidates.  It localizes each proven
root to a rigorous ray-parameter interval, pairs mutually unique observations
across one shared Bezier-span boundary, derives direction from the certified
determinant sign, and classifies the pair against an outward model minimum-
segment interval.  A deliberately narrow production gate accepts only one
resolved, clean-interior ENTER/LEAVE pair with exactly two complete parents,
no ambiguity/capacity/failure state, and no unrelated local root.  It restores
all six formerly missing condition-100 and condition-1,000 analytic grazing
chords while exact contact, subminimum/ambiguous intervals, near-trim roots,
and unsupported topology retain the dense-tree fallback.  The fixed 128-hit
path remains allocation-free and no tree density has changed.
Parallel BREP import, cache deserialization, and SurfaceTree construction now
also pass the complete cache matrix under ThreadSanitizer without suppressions.
Phase 0 baselines documented in brep_raytrace_plan.txt remain authoritative.


REPOSITORY STATE AT START
-------------------------

Starting HEAD:

  c1a962399c note

The worktree was clean when implementation began.  The detailed plan is
already tracked by commit 4edf531392 ("stash plan document").

No AGENTS.md file was found in the repository.

Existing build tree:

  /home/cyapp/brlcad/.build

Relevant existing tests:

  src/librt/tests/primitive_brep.cpp -> rt_primitive_brep
  src/librt/tests/crofton.c          -> rt_crofton


ESTABLISHED FINDINGS
--------------------

1. Commit 23eabb2c056fc7d0c4ccc6c5d9299f72eedbb432 correctly replaced the
   unsafe file-static SurfaceTree::hasSplit cache with a per-SurfaceTree
   SurfaceSplitCache.  Do not restore the static cache.

2. brep_build_bvh currently leaks each SurfaceTree.  This leak prevents
   SurfaceTree::~SurfaceTree from double-deleting its root after that root is
   attached to the master BVH.  CurveTrees likewise lack an owner after cache
   deserialization.  No repository reader of ON_BrepFace::m_face_user.p was
   found.

3. The current Newton solver fails to accept an initially converged root before
   checking its Jacobian.  Its singular "jitter" is identically zero on the
   first iteration and uses drand48.  Ev1Der/finite/normal results need checks.

4. The current fixed BREP_EDGE_MISS_TOLERANCE is used in incompatible UV and
   model-space roles.  This will be addressed only after Phase 1 behavior is
   isolated and tested.

5. The historical Cobb generator is a valid but non-solid six-face patch set
   with 24 independent edges.  libbrep now provides both that representation
   and a valid, closed, oriented variant with 8 shared vertices, 12 shared
   edges, and 24 trims.  The support surfaces are an exact sphere to sampled
   roundoff.  Controlled seam/trim perturbations are still required.

6. Primary correctness validation will pair original implicit/CSG raytracing
   with converted BREP raytracing on identical lines, including Crofton
   crossing/chord statistics.  Grazing tests will sweep signed clearance and
   verify the two-root -> tangent-contact -> no-root limit.

7. The old native ID_BSPLINE ray path dates to the 1991 Release 4.0 NURB
   module.  It was compile-time unreachable after ID_BSPLINE began converting
   to BREP in 2009, and it could not compile if re-enabled after its hit-list
   helpers were deleted in 2010.  Its live nmg_nurb_intersect engine projects
   a surface onto two ray planes, applies control-hull clipping, and recursively
   subdivides.  Those concepts are useful precedents, but the implementation
   allocates and copies surfaces during recursion, has fixed-size/order
   assumptions, stops on a UV-only tolerance, has no trim support, and the old
   wrapper fabricated a 0.01-unit exit for odd hit counts.  Do not port it.

8. The first R=10 mm grazing sweep found a deterministic but incorrect
   baseline.  As h -> 0+ the converted BREP chord stopped converging and
   approached about 0.001812758 mm.  At exact tangency it reported that false
   interval, and it reported false intervals for small negative h out to
   between approximately -7.45e-8 mm and -1.49e-7 mm.  The conditioned root
   test described in Finding 11 has repaired this baseline.  Keep the history
   as evidence for why the permanent exact-tangent and negative-h gates exist.

9. Solver work follows a corpus-first ratchet rule learned from the STEP work:
   reproduce difficult cases in C/C++ with analytic or paired implicit
   oracles, keep permanent passing gates, permit documented defects to improve
   without freezing their bad answer, and promote each repaired defect to a
   hard gate.  Avoid isolated changes tested only against their motivating
   model.

10. A ray starting exactly on the +X sphere seam and pointing outward is a
    raw miss in rt_sph_shot, which explicitly rejects an outside/on-surface
    origin pointing away.  Current BREP shot instead returns the wholly
    nonpositive interval [-2R, 0].  The in-memory corpus permits that known
    result to disappear, but requires determinism and forbids any forward
    material.  Once BREP applies the normal half-ray/partition policy, promote
    this case to exact implicit parity.

11. A fixed perpendicular line residual is not a sufficient root criterion at
    tangency.  For a unit surface normal N and ray direction D, residual divided
    by |N dot D|/|D| is the first-order error along the ray.  Root acceptance
    now requires that estimate to satisfy the numerical root tolerance, with a
    1e-13 residual floor for exact/double contact.  Residuals are evaluated
    from S-ray_origin instead of a global plane offset, avoiding cancellation
    on million-unit translated fixtures.  This retained the singular north
    pole, small/large scale, and translated cases while repairing the grazing
    limit.  This is solver conditioning, not the final contact or seam policy.

12. The correct first CSG stress test preserves the Boolean hierarchy and
    replaces only exactly convertible implicit leaves with BREP leaves.  It
    does not collapse the tree through ON_Boolean.  Disjoint and overlapping
    sphere unions, a sphere-intersection lens, a concentric subtraction
    cavity, and box-minus-cylinder all agree on every directed and shared line
    in this form.

13. A diagnostic experiment that did collapse the same binary trees to single
    evaluated BREPs separated Boolean-conversion defects from ray-solver
    defects.  Disjoint sphere union and concentric cavity happened to match,
    but overlapping union, intersection lens, and box-minus-cylinder were
    geometrically wrong before raytracing.  At 8,000 lines, overlapping union
    produced BREP area/volume about 313.2/527.7 versus implicit 497.6/937.5;
    the lens produced about 265.4/469.5 versus 121.9/105.5; and the drilled
    box produced zero BREP chord volume with invalid partitions.  Treat this
    as a later ON_Boolean/conversion qualification problem, not evidence
    against the leaf BREP intersection solver.

14. Two later-stage duality tiers are now specified in the plan: replacing
    exactly convertible leaves throughout larger existing CSG databases while
    preserving their trees, and using the experimental `brep csg`/
    brep_to_csg shape recognizer to reconstruct full or partial implicit trees
    from controlled and NIST BREP examples.  Fully implicit reconstructions
    are independent oracles; mixed reconstructions must disclose residual
    BREP leaves and make a weaker claim.

15. The openNURBS expert NewFace documentation says its vertex indices are
    ordered (SW, SE, NW, NE), but NewOuterLoop in the implementation consumes
    them in boundary order (SW, SE, NE, NW) and relates edge i to vertices i
    and (i+1)%4.  Reusing two adjacent Cobb edges exposed the inconsistency.
    Cobb construction follows the implementation order and the topology tests
    make this dependency observable.

16. The first controlled bowed-seam sweep proves that current tolerance logic
    does not reliably preserve the intended solid.  Moving only the three
    interior boundary CVs of one Cobb face inward, while preserving endpoints,
    shared topology, and declaring the measured edge tolerance, can remove one
    near-grazing root.  At g/T=1 the defect persists through h/T=0.9, where the
    analytic two-root separation is about 379T (a 0.1897 mm chord for the
    current T=0.0005 mm).  Normal partition assembly may then discard the
    entire interval.  The 416-ray matrix currently records 15 below-envelope
    zero-partition leaks and one forward/reverse inconsistency.  Leakage does
    not currently spread to h greater than the measured gap; that is now a
    one-way ratchet, while any repaired cases are allowed to disappear.

17. Near tangency, a surface displacement g can amplify into an along-ray
    endpoint change much larger than g, approximately through the same
    1/|N dot D| conditioning governing the solver.  Therefore seam validation
    cannot gate endpoint error directly by g.  It must distinguish geometric
    support uncertainty, root conditioning, interval existence/winding, and
    final minimum-segment policy.

18. The arbitrary-direction nominal h=0 seam lines expose a zero-chord
    implicit contact partition to the normal callback, with tangent normals
    that intentionally fail material entry/exit orientation.  Raw axis-aligned
    exact tangency remains a miss.  Machine reports preserve this distinction;
    contact events must be canonicalized explicitly rather than being treated
    as ordinary material partitions.

19. Raw-shot instrumentation localizes 14 of the 15 below-envelope crack
    leaks before legacy trim and event cleanup: fewer than two distinct
    geometric roots were found.  For inward g/T=1, h/T=0.9, two subdivision
    leaves converge to the same clean adjacent-face root at t about 19.9051;
    duplicate cleanup correctly reduces them to one event, while the bowed
    target support has no mathematical intersection.  Reversing the line
    produces the same physical root at t about 20.0949.  The missing solid
    crossing therefore requires a topology-local seam closure event inside
    the authorized 3D edge envelope.  It cannot be repaired by loosening the
    Newton residual, accepting a trim miss, or retaining duplicate seeds.
    The remaining leak has at least two distinct candidates and is lost in
    cleanup; no leak in this matrix is caused by trim classification.

20. A direct line-to-shared-edge observation supplies the missing model-space
    evidence independently of the UV trim tree.  Across all 416 bowed-seam
    rays, the target-edge distance follows |h| with maximum error about
    3.59e-15 mm, is unchanged by ray reversal, and qualifies exactly inside
    the edge's declared tolerance.  All 15 below-envelope leaks have this
    target-edge evidence; target-edge observations outside the declared
    envelope do not qualify.  The current implementation is deliberately
    trace-only and uses a fixed sampling/refinement budget.  It must not
    change production results until prepared edge spans provide conservative
    exclusion and the local manifold-sector transition is implemented.

21. Eligible two-trim edges can be prepared without enlarging the serialized
    cache format.  Exact-parameter NURBS forms are decomposed into nonempty
    rational Bezier spans; positive weights make the Euclidean control-point
    hull a conservative curve bound.  A line within the declared edge
    tolerance must intersect the span box expanded by that tolerance.  Cobb
    produces 12 supported edges and 12 spans, and every one of the 15 current
    leaks selects its target span conservatively.  Curves whose NURBS form
    changes parameterization, nonpositive or invalid weights, incomplete
    spans, and malformed topology are explicitly unsupported and remain on
    the legacy fallback path.  The bounded closest-point estimate remains
    diagnostic rather than a proof; only box exclusion is presently claimed
    conservative.

22. Edge proximity alone is insufficient: the closest ray point must also be
    on the intended material side of an authorized manifold sector.  The
    shadow classifier maps the edge fraction to both trims with m_bRev3d,
    evaluates both surface lifts and oriented normals, projects loop-interior
    conormals into the edge cross-section, and selects the interior angular
    sector from the material side of both faces.  It rejects the sector unless
    both lifts are within the then-effective edge tolerance.  A sharp convex ARB8
    edge, a 270-degree concave edge on a capped L extrusion, and a periodic
    same-face sphere seam now permanently check inside/contact/outside offsets
    in both ray directions.  With the initial model/declared tolerance policy,
    252 target observations in the bowed Cobb matrix qualify: 152 inside, 32
    contact, and 68 outside; all 15 current crack leaks have valid inside-
    sector evidence.  Maximum target lift-discrepancy error is about
    2.51e-15 mm.  This remains trace-only.  General STEP use still needs
    stronger trim/edge parameter-correspondence qualification and vertex-fan
    fixtures.

23. An unresolved solid hit can be considered for topology-local closure only
    when exactly one eligible inside-sector edge is incident to its existing
    face and lies on the correct side of that event along the ray.  The new
    shadow classifier records the edge, its projected t, the existing root t,
    and whether the missing event is entering or leaving.  It identifies all
    15 current below-envelope Cobb leaks with exactly one candidate: forward
    rays have a missing leave after the existing enter, and reversed rays have
    a missing enter before the existing leave.  It does not activate on the
    target edge's contact or exterior states.  Identity, rotated/translated,
    0.01x, and 10,000x copies preserve all sector and closure classifications
    when both geometric and modeling tolerances are scaled as lengths.  The
    small-scale nonlinear root moves about 6e-7 mm in baseline-normalized
    coordinates, well below T=0.0005 mm; classifier invariance and solver
    accuracy therefore have separate gates.  This remains trace-only and does
    not emit a synthetic hit.  The edge projection is not an accurate missing
    endpoint near tangency, so production activation requires a bounded local
    continuation solve rather than using that projection as the root.

24. Exact-parameter positive-weight NURBS surface spans can be prepared by the
    same policy used for edge spans.  Each face record owns its rational
    Bezier patches, original UV domains, and Euclidean control-hull box.
    Reparameterized GetNurbForm results, invalid/nonpositive weights, malformed
    knot spans, and incomplete conversions mark the complete face unsupported
    rather than admitting unsafe partial data.  The two homogeneous ray-plane
    numerator coefficient hulls now conservatively reject spans in trace mode.
    Their floating-point margin includes the pre-cancellation |CV|+|O*W|
    arithmetic scale, not just the final coefficient magnitude; this is
    essential for translated geometry.  All six Cobb faces produce one span,
    and the representative grazing line retains two of six spans.  Candidate
    counts are invariant across the tested similarities.  Surface spans are
    rebuilt from the cached BREP, so cache format version zero is unchanged.

25. For the controlled bowed seam, the existing adjacent-face root supplies a
    deterministic seed for a shadow continuation: map the authorized edge to
    that face's trim, reflect the root across the local trim tangent, and solve
    the prepared Bezier support in a bounded extension outside its ordinary
    [0,1]^2 span.  A fixed 24-iteration Newton/line-search budget uses the same
    conditioned ray residual and does no ray-time allocation.  All 15 current
    below-envelope leaks yield exactly one continuation with the required
    orientation and ordering.  Maximum error against the implicit sphere's
    missing endpoint is about 2.71e-8 mm.  The g/T=1, h/T=0.9 representative
    converges in three iterations from the reflected seed and agrees with the
    implicit endpoint to about 1e-12 mm in both ray directions.  Identity,
    rigid, 0.01x, and 10,000x cases preserve the candidate and continuation
    classifications.  This is deliberately not production-ready: reflection
    in parameter space is only a seed, the extension has not yet been covered
    by conservative coefficient subdivision, and vertex/multiple-root cases
    need explicit fallback and uniqueness proofs.  No synthetic hit is
    emitted.

26. Tensor-product scalar Bernstein nets are sufficient for allocation-free
    conservative root isolation on the ordinary [0,1]^2 surface span.  The
    prepared homogeneous control points generate two ray-plane numerator nets
    plus a ray-t numerator and positive weight net.  A depth-first stack keeps
    only parameter boxes; fixed scratch arrays re-extract each subdomain with
    de Casteljau restriction.  Orders above 16 make the face unsupported, the
    pending stack is capped at 64, and depth is capped at 24.  Every capacity,
    overflow, maximum depth, visited-box count, retained-box count, and stack
    high-water mark is observable.  Retained UV boxes carry conservative ray-t
    intervals from the rational convex hull.  Across the bowed Cobb matrix the
    maximum is 226 visited boxes, six retained boxes, depth 24, and stack high-
    water 24; every legacy Newton root lies in both a retained UV box and its
    t interval.  The representative root is narrowed to duplicate
    trim-boundary boxes with t about [19.90313,19.90660], far smaller than its
    0.1897 mm analytic chord.  The ordinary sphere grazing sweep retains both
    analytic roots down through one model tolerance and no one box covers both
    roots once the chord is at least 10T.  Exact tangency retains a contact box
    while production emits no interval.  On the miss side, only nine
    floating-limit cases remain ambiguous and the largest clearance is about
    2.27e-9 T; ambiguity beyond 1e-6 T is now forbidden.  Peak sphere work is
    228 boxes, eight retained boxes, and stack high-water 25.  Similarity cases
    preserve candidate, visited, and retained counts.  This still needs safe
    coefficient treatment for the continuation's outside-span extension and
    an adaptive termination/box corrector before it can replace dense trees.

27. A bounded Bezier continuation interval can be handled without assuming
    the rational convex-hull property survives arbitrary extrapolation.
    Algebraic de Casteljau reparameterization maps the requested outside-span
    rectangle back to [0,1]^2.  Its exact control-net operator infinity norm
    is computed from transformed Bernstein basis vectors and used to amplify
    all inherited coefficient error bounds.  The reparameterized weight hull
    must remain positive beyond that error or the certificate fails.  The
    normal fixed-capacity isolator then proves which UV/t boxes remain.  A
    continuation is certified only when every retained box contains the
    solved root cluster and none can also contain the existing root.  All 15
    below-envelope leaks pass.  Maximum certificate work is 93 boxes, stack
    high-water 20, and maximum retained t-cluster width about 5.15e-5 mm;
    there are no positive-weight, workspace, trace-capacity, or existing-root
    overlaps.  The certified transition pair assembles exactly one shadow
    material segment for all 15 leaks, with both endpoints within 1e-7 mm of
    the implicit sphere interval in both ray directions.  Normal segment
    emission is still unchanged.  General activation remains blocked on
    stronger trim/edge correspondence, declared/inferred tolerance policy,
    non-isoparametric and vertex cases, stable shading endpoint provenance,
    and conservative fallback integration.

28. Edge tolerance metadata must not collapse unset, explicit zero, and a
    positive declaration into one sentinel test.  Prep now records the ray
    model tolerance, raw edge declaration, initial measured edge-to-both-trim-
    lift discrepancy, effective envelope, inferred/declaration source, and an
    explicit discrepancy-authorized bit.  The effective envelope is at least
    rti_tol.dist; valid edge and endpoint-vertex declarations can enlarge it.
    Explicit zero remains a declaration rather than being inferred.  An unset
    edge tolerance is initially inferred from the larger of model tolerance
    and sampled discrepancy.  The discrepancy must actually lie within the
    envelope before edge boxes, sectors, closure, or continuation qualify.
    A g=2T Cobb metadata matrix proves these outcomes: correct and double
    declarations authorize visibly; unset is inferred and authorizes; zero
    and half-discrepancy declarations remain under-authorized and do not even
    select an expanded edge span.  Rotation, translation, 0.01x, and 10,000x
    tests also preserve model tolerance, measured discrepancy, and
    authorization after scaling.  The present prep measurement is a fixed
    33-sample observation, deliberately reduced from an expensive 257-sample
    diagnostic.  It is not a conservative discrepancy proof, so this policy
    cannot by itself authorize general production closure.  The narrowly
    promoted one-event resolver additionally requires both incident trim
    lifts evaluated at the event's edge parameter to be within rti_tol.dist,
    plus unique topology/sector evidence and a complete root certificate.
    General edge-envelope policy still requires knot-aware adaptive bounds.
    Cached prep now explicitly rebuilds both edge and surface derived records
    using the active rti tolerance; the serialized cache remains version zero.

29. A retained coefficient box can seed a mathematical surface root without
    consulting the legacy SurfaceTree.  Trace mode maps a fixed deterministic
    set consisting of the box center, four corners, and four edge midpoints
    into its prepared rational Bezier span.  Each seed runs a fixed
    24-iteration, line-searched corrector bounded by that box.  Projecting
    Newton steps onto the box is necessary for roots on shared Bezier-span
    boundaries; the residual test still prevents a projected boundary point
    from becoming a false root.  Same-span results are deduplicated with a
    scale-aware numerical t tolerance.  Attempts, failures, duplicates,
    unique candidates, and capacity overflow are separately observable.  The
    ordinary convergence target scales with the local support diagonal, while
    a separate 32-epsilon world-coordinate floor admits only the cancellation
    inherent in evaluating translated geometry.  The retained-box t check
    uses the same scale-aware numerical allowance rather than a fixed model-
    space constant.

    On the analytic R=10 sphere, all 36 cases with chord at least T recover
    two distinct local root clusters and both analytic endpoints within
    8.56e-8 mm.  All 23 positive cases below T collapse to one contact-sized
    cluster; exact tangency also forms one cluster and no material segment.
    On the miss side, numerical contact candidates occur only within about
    2.84e-10 T, tighter than the existing 1e-6 T ambiguity gate.  The complete
    bowed Cobb matrix has no local root absent from the legacy candidate set.
    Fourteen of the 15 below-envelope leaks expose one in-domain local cluster.
    The remaining sub-tolerance boundary case has three: the valid entry, the
    bowed-face crossing, and the exact seam-boundary crossing.  A center-only
    solve had found only the first two; the alternate boundary seeds make the
    third basin observable.  All 15 still require the separately certified
    adjacent-support root to reproduce the implicit interval.  The machine
    report records every local face, span, UV, t, residual, normal dot, and
    iteration count plus per-ray attempt accounting.

    Identity, rigid rotation/translation, translated 0.01x scale, and
    translated 10,000x scale now gate the local corrector's failure count,
    normalized regular-root positions, residuals, and physical contact-cluster
    count alongside the edge-sector and closure classifier.  Raw numerical
    representatives of an exactly singular contact may differ while still
    forming the same one physical cluster.  This answers the similarity
    question for the present controlled corpus: the classifier and bounded
    local solve are invariant when all model-space tolerances scale with the
    geometry.
    Arbitrary nonuniform scaling is not a similarity and remains a separate
    transformed-surface case.  These roots are still trace-only: production
    traversal, trim/event classification, adaptive termination, and fallback
    integration are not yet changed.

30. Local mathematical roots now feed a first allocation-free clustering
    stage rather than relying on test-side vectors alone.  A fixed insertion
    sort orders at most 64 roots by t.  The initial compatibility rule joins
    only roots on the same face whose t values are within 0.1 of the active
    model distance tolerance; each cluster records its t and normal-dot range,
    root count, entering/leaving/tangent observations, face, and preliminary
    ENTER/LEAVE/CONTACT/UNRESOLVED class.  Capacity and the provisional
    clustering tolerance are explicit trace fields.  This 0.1T value is a
    shadow rollout policy, not the final ray-interval or minimum-valid-size
    tolerance.

    Every sphere case with analytic chord at least T now produces exactly two
    ordered clusters, ENTER followed by LEAVE.  Exact tangency produces one
    CONTACT cluster.  The classifier similarity matrix gates cluster counts;
    exactly singular raw representative counts may change with floating
    conditioning, but identity, rigid, 0.01x, and 10,000x cases all retain one
    physical contact cluster.  The bowed leak matrix produces cluster-count
    histogram 14/0/1 for one/two/three clusters.  Machine output includes each
    cluster and exact attempt = unique + duplicate + failure accounting.

    This is deliberately not the final topology resolver.  Cross-face roots
    require shared-edge/same-surface-seam compatibility, trimmed candidates
    require evidence-preserving classification, clusters need certified t
    intervals rather than point-distance grouping, and minimum-segment policy
    must remain separate.  No production event or segment is emitted from
    these preliminary clusters.

31. Surface-tree leaf discovery now has an allocation-free fixed-array
    overload in shadow mode.  It traverses the existing prepared child vectors
    in exactly the same depth-first order as the std::list overload, stores up
    to 128 leaf pointers in caller-owned memory, continues counting after
    capacity, and reports overflow explicitly.  Trace-mode shooting still
    invokes the allocating traversal first and uses its list for the live
    solver loop; the fixed traversal is compared by total count and pointer
    order, so the list remains an automatic correctness fallback while the
    shadow path is qualified.

    Every traced sphere grazing/contact/miss ray, tolerance-metadata ray,
    convex/concave/periodic sector ray, classifier similarity ray, and all 416
    bowed-seam rays now hard-gate count equality, order equality, and absence
    of overflow.  The ordinary sphere grazing sweep reaches 8 intersected
    leaves, the bowed matrix reaches 12, and the translated/rotated 0.01x
    similarity reaches 68.  The latter initially exhausted a 64-entry trial
    capacity, demonstrating that geometric similarity does not imply an
    invariant dense-tree leaf count even though the physical event classifier
    remains invariant.  The retained 128-entry trace workspace is 1 KiB of
    pointers on 64-bit systems and has explicit accounting; it is not a claim
    that 128 is sufficient for arbitrary corpus models.

    This shadow checkpoint removes allocation from leaf collection itself,
    not from the complete production shot.  Hit lists, miss/trim cleanup, and
    fallback/event integration still allocate.  Any live promotion must make
    its capacity decision before partial solver or cleanup side effects.

32. After the count/order shadow gate passed, production leaf discovery was
    promoted to the 128-pointer fixed array.  Capacity is resolved before any
    surface solver or hit-cleanup state is mutated.  A ray exceeding capacity
    immediately rebuilds the legacy std::list and runs the unchanged solver
    loop from that list; a bounded ray runs the solver in the already-proven
    fixed-array order.  Trace mode deliberately builds both representations,
    reports whether fallback was selected, and continues to gate their exact
    equivalence.  All current trace fixtures take the bounded path, and the
    focused cache, analytic, Cobb, and NURBS suite remains 13/13.  A separate
    Debug build instrumented with AddressSanitizer and UndefinedBehavior-
    Sanitizer also passes the complete rt_brep_ray corpus without a sanitizer
    diagnostic.  LeakSanitizer cannot run under the host ptrace wrapper and is
    explicitly not claimed by this gate.

    This promotion removes dynamic allocation from production surface-tree
    leaf collection for bounded rays.  It does not yet make BREP shooting
    allocation-free: brep_hit and cleanup structures remain std::list based,
    and an over-capacity leaf ray intentionally allocates in the safe legacy
    fallback.  Root/event conversion must preserve the same rule: decide to
    fall back before applying any partial cleanup or material-state change.

33. ThreadSanitizer qualification of parallel cache prep exposed four real
    publication races before it could validate SurfaceTree ownership.  The
    libbu small-object heap raced on its process-global lazy atexit flag, and
    bu_dir used a process-global scratch buffer even when callers supplied an
    output buffer.  Heap registration is now serialized only when a per-CPU
    size bin is initialized, and the legacy implicit bu_dir result buffer is
    thread-local.  The ordinary bu_dir and heap tests pass.

    openNURBS ONX_Model construction, archive reading/writing, and destruction
    rebuild render-setting defaults through non-reentrant localtime().  All
    ONX_Model lifetimes in the BREP primitive are now wrapped by the reserved
    datetime semaphore.  This serializes BREP archive import/export, not
    SurfaceTree construction or ray prep.  It can be narrowed or removed once
    the external OpenNURBS implementation uses localtime_r/localtime_s.

    More importantly, _rt_find_identical_solid published a soltab by setting
    st_id before primitive prep or cache deserialization completed.  A second
    tree-walk worker could therefore consume st_specific while
    rt_brep_prep_serialize was still assigning it.  soltab now has an explicit
    prep-complete publication flag protected by the same directory-hash
    semaphore used for identical-solid lookup.  Matching workers wait without
    holding the semaphore, and success or failure publishes all primitive
    pointers, bounds, and path state before reuse.  The hierarchy fixture also
    exposed the documented race caused by incrementing directory d_uses under
    different region and solid locks; both uses now share the directory-hash
    semaphore without nested lock ordering.

    The normal focused suite remains 13/13, the ASan/UBSan focused suite is
    12/12 with leak detection disabled for the host ptrace limitation, and all
    seven serial/parallel cache tests pass under ThreadSanitizer with
    halt_on_error=1 and no suppression file.  This is the first direct race
    qualification of the repaired per-BREP SurfaceTree and CurveTree ownership
    path; it does not prove unrelated librt operations outside this cache
    matrix race-free.

34. A topological edge parameter and an incident trim parameter do not in
    general have the same normalized fraction, even when both curves describe
    exactly the same locus.  The former discrepancy sampler, material-sector
    frame, and continuation seed all made that representation-dependent
    assumption.  They now map an edge point to each incident surface-lifted
    trim geometrically: an orientation-aware normalized value is only an
    initial hint, a fixed 33-sample scan finds a deterministic basin, and a
    bounded 24-step Gauss-Newton corrector with an eight-step line search
    minimizes 3D lift distance.  The composed trim/surface derivative is used
    only by correction; point-only scans avoid unnecessary derivative work.
    The routine allocates no ray-time memory and rejects invalid domains,
    topology, evaluation results, and nonfinite arithmetic.

    A copied bowed Cobb sphere converts both trims of the target edge to NURBS
    and applies opposite Möbius reparameterizations c=0.05 and c=20.  This
    changes the UV point evaluated at the trim-domain midpoint by at least
    0.452 while preserving the curve locus to 2.48e-16.  The fixture refreshes
    each OpenNURBS proxy domain after knot roundoff and requires the BREP to
    remain valid.  Against the identity case it preserves all inward,
    contact, and exterior sector states in both ray directions, measured
    discrepancy, unique closure and missing direction, continuation
    certificate, and published production interval.  The existing rotation,
    translation, 0.01x, and 10,000x similarity cases remain unchanged.

    This establishes regular two-trim correspondence invariance for the
    controlled fixture.  By itself it is not a conservative proof of the
    maximum seam discrepancy: the preparatory 33 edge samples and
    correspondence basin scan remain fixed.  Finding 35 adds a bounded shadow
    certificate for its supported regular subset; ambiguous or
    self-overlapping trims, exact-locus promotion, and vertex fans remain open
    and must retain explicit unsupported fallback.

35. A prep-time shadow pass now constructs a knot-aware conservative interval
    for the geometric gap between each supported shared 3D edge locus and
    each of its two surface-lifted trim loci.  The edge was already decomposed
    into exact-parameter positive-weight rational Bezier spans.  The new pass
    converts each trim to an exact NURBS form, splits it at every positive knot
    span, and uses the prepared exact-parameter positive-weight surface spans.
    It rejects unsupported order, weights, domains, topology, incomplete trim
    coverage, inconsistent orientation, nonfinite evaluation, and ambiguous
    endpoint correspondence instead of manufacturing a certificate.

    Each initial cell pairs one edge Bezier span with the incident trim
    interval found by the fixed geometric edge-to-lift projection.  Adjacent
    mapped intervals must be continuous and cover the complete trim domain in
    the direction required by m_bRev3d.  Child midpoints repeat the geometric
    projection inside the parent trim interval using a bounded nine-sample
    basin scan.  This preserves the nonlinear trim-reparameterization result
    without restoring the equal-normalized-speed assumption.

    Positive rational Bezier convexity supplies the actual bound.  The edge
    control points bound its Hausdorff deviation from its endpoint chord.  A
    knot-aware restricted trim control hull bounds the UV interval, and each
    overlapping prepared surface patch is restricted to that rectangle with
    fixed-array homogeneous de Casteljau operations.  The restricted positive
    surface control hull then bounds the lifted trim's deviation from its
    endpoint chord.  Exact segment Hausdorff distance plus or minus the two
    chord deviations gives a conservative cell interval; maxima combine cells
    and the two incident faces.  The UV rectangle is padded by a
    parameter-scale roundoff allowance before surface restriction.

    Cells subdivide until the aggregate interval is no wider than 0.1 model
    tolerance, with maximum depth 24.  Prep work is limited to 4,096 visited
    cells per solid.  Capacity exhaustion is recorded on both an interrupted
    edge and any later otherwise-eligible edge; no partial result is marked
    bounded.  Per-edge lower/upper limits, target width, cells, maximum depth,
    and exhaustion state are exposed in the trace and Cobb CSV.  Temporary
    vectors and Bezier objects are prep-time only; the pass adds no ray-time
    allocation.

    Scope is deliberately narrow at this checkpoint.  Exact-looking records
    at or below max(roundoff, 1e-6 T) remain unbounded because a zero fixed
    sample is not an exact-locus proof.  Records whose established sample is
    already beyond the model envelope skip the expensive upper certificate.
    The bound is shadow evidence only: discrepancy_authorized and production
    crack repair still use the pre-existing sampled policy.  Promotion needs
    complete exact-locus handling, unsupported/capacity fallback policy, and
    a tighter decision at the g=T boundary.

    The bowed Cobb target requires 2,046 cells at depth 9 and its worst final
    interval width is 0.0823 T.  It remains bounded under identity, opposite
    c=0.05/c=20 trim reparameterizations, rigid transform, 0.01x similarity,
    and 10,000x similarity with scaled model tolerances.  Every dense
    calibrated g<=T bowed case lies inside its reported interval; g>T cases
    are explicitly outside this shadow pass.  A separate three-seam matching
    fixture consumes exactly 4,096 cells, certifies two seams, and marks the
    third exhausted, proving that capacity neither truncates nor silently
    qualifies a record.

    Prep-cost experiments prevented an attractive local algorithm from
    becoming a new global cost.  Allocating OpenNURBS patch restriction in
    every cell made rt_brep_ray take 47.8 seconds; fixed homogeneous arrays
    reduced that to about 33 seconds; the 0.1 T target took 22.15 seconds.
    Skipping exact-looking records reduced it to 9.06 seconds.  Imported NIST
    geometry still exposed roughly 60 seconds of prep on many sub-tolerance
    seams; skipping already-rejected samples reduced that to 11.74 seconds,
    and the solid-wide budget reduced NIST03_MISS_01 to about 0.7 seconds.
    The current normal focused gate completes in about 10 seconds.  These are
    engineering observations on this host, not performance acceptance limits.

36. At this checkpoint edge-sector and crack-repair evidence first required a
    prep-time regular correspondence screen in addition to sampled discrepancy
    authorization.  Finding 64 supersedes the screen's authority with a
    conservative global proof while retaining its result as telemetry.
    Each incident trim is converted to NURBS, visited four times in every
    positive knot span (at most 256 samples), lifted through its face, and
    projected geometrically back to the 3D edge.  The fixed projection uses a
    33-point basin scan followed by at most 24 second-derivative corrections
    and an eight-step line search.  In trim-domain order, projected edge
    parameters must remain monotone with the direction implied by m_bRev3d,
    and the unit lifted tangent must retain positive oriented agreement with
    the local unit edge tangent.  Closed or numerically degenerate edges,
    failed NURBS/evaluation/projection, more than 256 samples, a reversal, or
    a stationary/opposed tangent leave correspondence_supported false.

    At that checkpoint the sampled result populated correspondence_supported
    and gated expanded edge spans, material sectors, the discrepancy pass, and
    crack repair without suppressing ordinary surface intersection or the
    legacy result.  It was explicitly only a bounded rejection screen: a
    localized higher-order reversal could occur between samples.  Finding 64
    implements the required exact/interval derivative proof and moves the old
    result to correspondence_screened.

    The ambiguity fixture starts with the known g=T bowed Cobb seam whose
    h=0.9T ray otherwise activates the certified production repair.  One trim
    is replaced by a piecewise-linear NURBS that follows the identical UV
    boundary forward, backward, and forward.  Its 3D locus and sampled gap
    remain authorized, but the middle span reverses both edge parameter and
    tangent.  In both ray directions the screen is false, no candidate edge
    span or sector is published, and the legacy one-event crack remains
    observable without closure, continuation, or a manufactured segment.

    A converted convex ARB8 supplies the initial vertex-fan fallback fixture.
    Body-diagonal rays in both directions and rays beginning exactly at the
    vertex observe all three incident edges as CONTACT while preserving the
    two-hit/one-interval solid result and never invoking closure.  A second
    line passes 0.25T inside the vertex fan; three incident edges qualify and
    two independently classify the ray as material-side, but neither ray
    direction attempts edge closure.  This gates non-repair at a multi-edge
    locus while a cyclic oriented vertex-fan resolver is still absent.

    The focused normal gate passes 13/13 (rt_brep_ray about 10.2 seconds and
    NIST03_MISS_01 about 0.82 seconds).  The focused ASan/UBSan gate passes
    12/12 with halt-on-error and leak detection disabled for the existing host
    limitation; rt_brep_ray completes in about 40.2 seconds without a
    diagnostic.

37. Fixed trace storage now records bidirectional root-set coverage between
    the prepared positive-weight Bezier-span corrector and the existing
    depth-eight SurfaceTree-seeded Newton solve.  Each side is sorted and
    deduplicated by face and ray parameter using the similarity-scaled 0.1 T
    cluster tolerance, then the ordered sets are matched one-to-one without
    allocation.  BREP_SAME_POINT_TOLERANCE is used only when no positive model
    tolerance exists.  One-to-one matching prevents a single prepared root
    from masking the loss of one of two nearby legacy roots.  Accounting
    remains explicit when either fixed trace array overflows; completeness
    claims are gated only when all involved workspaces remain within capacity.

    Across the analytic sphere grazing sweep, every unique legacy candidate
    root has a prepared-span match.  The prepared solver has one direct-only
    root on the closest representable outside line, h/T approximately
    -2.84217e-10.  Four span-boundary representatives collapse to one physical
    contact at t=2R, residual approximately 1.42e-13, zero normal dot, and no
    final material interval.  The gate accepts outside candidates only when
    they form exactly one CONTACT cluster at 2R, publish zero segments, and
    remain within the pre-existing 1e-6 T numerical ambiguity band.  It still
    fails any legacy root not covered by a prepared span.  The 416-ray bowed
    Cobb matrix has zero unmatched roots in either direction.

    The classifier similarity matrix now goes beyond an exact cyclic axis
    permutation.  It includes pure translation, the cyclic rotation, an
    arbitrary-axis unit-scale rotation, and independent arbitrary-axis
    rotations at 0.01x and 10,000x scale with translated geometry and all
    model-space tolerances scaled as lengths.  Normalized local root clusters,
    ENTER/LEAVE/CONTACT classes, edge-sector state, crack closure, continuation
    ordering, and the final production interval remain invariant in both ray
    directions.  Every legacy root in every transformed case has a prepared-
    span match.

    Acceleration work is deliberately not required to be invariant.  The
    oblique 0.01x case visits 104 of the 128 fixed dense-tree leaf slots,
    whereas the former exact-permutation matrix reached 68.  Candidate-hull
    and subdivision effort can change with the ray-plane basis even when the
    physical classifier does not.  This observation strengthens the need for
    explicit fixed-capacity fallback and is not evidence for increasing the
    fixed array.  Root coverage is still untrimmed candidate equivalence, not
    trim/event equivalence, and does not yet authorize reducing SurfaceTree
    depth or replacing the legacy event path.

    The focused normal gate passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray at about 10.3
    seconds.  The focused ASan/UBSan gate passes 12/12 in about 40.7 seconds
    with halt-on-error and no sanitizer diagnostic.

38. CurveTree now provides a face-wide isTrimmed query over its existing
    prep-time m_sortedX leaf vector.  It reuses the same trim-candidate and
    final-classification implementation as BBNode::isTrimmed, creates no
    filtered list, and stops once the X-sorted remaining leaves begin beyond
    the query parameter.  The dense leaf-local classifier remains production;
    the face-wide form supplies SurfaceTree-independent classification for
    prepared-span roots.

    Every stored prepared root now records trim status and distance, initial
    CLEAN_HIT/CLEAN_MISS/NEAR_HIT/NEAR_MISS class, closest near-edge adjacent
    face, and oriented direction.  Missing face CurveTrees are explicit trace
    failures.  At every legacy Newton root, trace mode independently reruns the
    face-wide classifier at the exact same UV and requires identical trim
    status, near/clean hit class, and adjacency whenever the event is within
    BREP_EDGE_MISS_TOLERANCE.  The sphere grazing matrix checks 256 such roots
    and 512 full-face trim candidates; the bowed Cobb matrix checks 1,112 roots
    and 2,328 candidates.  Both have zero semantic mismatch and zero near-trim
    distance error.  Prepared roots make 324/648 and 620/1,356 query/candidate
    visits respectively, without allocation.

    Root equivalence is now event-cluster equivalence rather than arbitrary
    representative-root equality.  Same-face candidates within the scaled
    0.1 T t envelope form a fixed stack cluster.  The cluster prefers actual
    material-side candidates over trimmed candidates, selects the minimum
    absolute trim distance within that state, derives near/clean class from
    that evidence, and combines root normal signs using the established
    BREP_GRAZING_DOT_TOL into ENTERING, LEAVING, or CONTACT.  Only near events
    require adjacency equality; a closest trim on a clean root has no cleanup
    semantics.

    This clustering distinction is essential.  A first raw comparison made
    all 110 sphere matches appear different because irrelevant clean-root
    closest-adjacency choices differed, and nine tangent candidates crossed
    zero normal dot while remaining far inside the grazing band.  The oblique
    0.01x exact-contact fixture also emits four legacy candidates (one clean
    and three near) versus four prepared near candidates.  Both contain the
    same exact near-edge contact, and both correctly collapse to one CONTACT;
    selecting the numerically earliest raw root would instead compare the
    legacy clean outlier.  The fixed physical event cluster avoids that error
    without weakening regular two-root separation.

    The final analytic sphere sweep has 110 matched event clusters and zero
    trim/class/direction/adjacency mismatch.  Its maximum matched t, UV, and
    normal-dot differences are approximately 1.96e-6, 3.46e-8, and 1.96e-7;
    no matched event is near a trim.  The 416-ray bowed Cobb matrix has 556
    matched clusters, zero semantic mismatch, and maximum corresponding
    differences about 9.84e-8, 6.92e-9, zero, and 9.84e-9.  All expanded
    similarity cases retain zero legacy-root and event mismatch.

    This establishes trim-aware initial-event equivalence on the controlled
    corpus, but it is not final cleanup equivalence.  Prepared clusters have
    not yet been materialized as fixed brep_hit events and passed through the
    duplicate/grazing/direction cleanup pipeline.  The face-wide trim query is
    allocation-free but scans a prefix of the X-sorted trim leaves; complex
    STEP faces may require a stronger prepared index after measurement.  Tree
    depth remains eight.  The focused normal gate passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray
    at 10.23 seconds.  ASan/UBSan passes 12/12 in 41.10 seconds with no
    diagnostic.

39. Prepared roots are now materialized in two allocation-free, fixed-stack
    shadow streams before any SurfaceTree density change.  The first retains
    every non-CLEAN_MISS prepared root as a brep_hit candidate.  It rebuilds
    the robust face normal with surface_EvNormal, preserves trim/near/adjacent-
    face/direction state, sorts in the existing fixed workspace, and executes
    the same near-miss, near-hit, grazing, duplicate, and direction cleanup
    implementation as production.  A parallel workspace made from the legacy
    Newton roots supplies per-stage physical signatures as well as raw count
    comparisons.  These paths are trace-only and are not called when the
    production trace pointer is null.

    Raw candidate multiplicity is intentionally not treated as physical
    equivalence.  The prepared solver sees roots from neighboring Bezier
    spans that the dense leaf solver may represent differently, especially at
    a tangent.  The sphere matrix has 324 prepared candidates and 25 raw
    stage-count differences.  Its only semantic difference at each of the
    five stages is the already classified prepared-only, zero-material contact
    on the nearest representable miss-side line.  The bowed Cobb matrix has
    620 candidates and 955 raw count differences.  Physical stage signatures
    differ 0/16/19/19/19 after near-miss, near-hit, grazing, duplicate, and
    direction cleanup respectively.  Exact near-miss-stage equivalence is a
    hard gate because that is where seam evidence is resolved; later
    differences are retained as observability and must be judged by their
    final material partitions rather than candidate count.

    The second stream materializes the already qualified physical event
    clusters.  CLEAN_MISS and CONTACT clusters are omitted because neither is
    a finite solid boundary.  The remaining events pass through fixed cleanup
    and the same certified single-event crack repair.  Up to eight final solid
    intervals are stored directly in the trace for comparison to both legacy
    output and independent implicit oracles.  Missing normals, unsupported
    direction, hit or segment capacity, and repair failures remain explicit;
    no capacity is silently increased.

    Across the analytic sphere sweep, 111 prepared groups contain 35 contacts
    and produce 76 material events, 38 aggregate segments, and zero legacy
    partition differences.  Across the 416-ray bowed Cobb family, 556 groups
    contain 38 contacts and produce 518 material events, 16 certified repairs,
    and 226 aggregate segments.  There is exactly one partition difference
    from the depth-eight solver and it is an independently demonstrated
    improvement, not bug-for-bug equivalence.  For the reverse inward-bowed
    g/T=0.1, h/T=0.1 case, legacy repairs
    [19.9997585419, 20.0316227402], while prepared events produce
    [19.9683772359, 20.0316227918].  The implicit sphere oracle is
    [19.9683772629, 20.0316227371]: prepared maximum endpoint error is about
    5.47e-8, while legacy error is about 3.14e-2.  The corpus classifies every
    final prepared/legacy difference as oracle improvement, regression, or
    ambiguous; it hard-fails regressions and ambiguous changes.  The present
    totals are 1/0/0.

    This is final-partition shadow qualification, not production promotion.
    Later raw cleanup stages still expose tangent/duplicate representation
    differences, adaptive ordinary-span subdivision still retains boxes down
    to depth 24, and the production SurfaceTree remains depth eight.  The
    focused normal gate passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray at 10.29 seconds.
    ASan/UBSan passes 12/12 in 40.55 seconds with no diagnostic.
    After the final stage-label refactor, direct normal and ASan/UBSan
    rt_brep_ray reruns pass in 9.24 and 36.80 seconds respectively.

40. A provisional interval Krawczyk test now supplies the first adaptive
    early-termination rule for ordinary prepared surface spans.  Given a
    bounded corrector root x in local parameter box X, it computes

      K(X) = x - C F(x) + (I - C J(X)) (X - x),

    where F is the pair of homogeneous ray-plane Bernstein polynomials, J(X)
    is bounded by the convex hulls of their derivative Bernstein
    coefficients, and C is the inverse of the midpoint interval Jacobian.
    Only strict containment of K(X) in the interior of X qualifies.  A failed
    corrector, singular preconditioner, failed inclusion, tangent Jacobian, or
    root on a subdivision/patch boundary says nothing and continues the
    existing subdivision path to depth 24.  Small UV, model-space, or ray-t
    width and numerical convergence alone never terminate a box.

    The implementation uses fixed arrays and performs no ray-time allocation.
    Coefficient uncertainty is propagated into function and derivative
    intervals; interval endpoints receive deliberately conservative error
    enlargement and nextafter expansion.  Corrector attempts/convergences,
    successful Krawczyk boxes and their depths, isolated-box ray-t widths,
    subdivision work, overflow, and high-water marks are observable.  The
    continuation certificate deliberately disables this new rule, preserving
    its prior depth-24 behavior.

    Three deterministic off-center, oblique sphere lines are shot in both
    directions.  All six have one implicit, legacy BREP, and prepared BREP
    partition with endpoints within model tolerance.  They produce 12
    physical events and exactly 12 Krawczyk-qualified boxes at depths 4
    through 9, with zero candidate-stage, semantic-stage, cleaned-hit,
    root/event, or final-partition differences.  Adaptive work is 294 visited
    boxes total and at most 64 per ray, versus a directly measured run with
    this one termination disabled of 1,038 total and 192 per ray at depth 24.
    That is a 71.7 percent reduction in subdivision visits for this regular-
    root fixture.  Correctors converge in 28 of 44 adaptive attempts.

    This does not weaken grazing qualification.  The analytic grazing sphere
    and 416-ray bowed Cobb matrices produce zero Krawczyk-qualified boxes;
    tangent, nearly tangent, trim-boundary, and patch-boundary candidates all
    remain on the depth-24 path.  Their root/event/partition results are
    unchanged, including the one independently proved prepared-partition
    improvement and zero regressions or ambiguous changes.  The production
    SurfaceTree still uses depth eight, and no production hit publication or
    tree density changed.

    R. E. Moore's 1977 existence test and Breiding, Rose, and Timme's modern
    interval certification treatment justify the strict Krawczyk inclusion
    rule and are recorded with primary-source links in the plan.  The current
    arithmetic is intentionally classified as shadow evidence, not a formal
    production certificate: an independent numerical audit must prove that
    every generated coefficient and function/Jacobian interval encloses the
    exact polynomial quantity on all supported orders, scales, and
    translations before production promotion.

    The final focused normal gate passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray at 9.30
    seconds.  The focused ASan/UBSan gate passes 12/12 in 33.20 seconds;
    rt_brep_ray takes 33.15 seconds in that parallel gate.  A final direct
    ASan/UBSan rerun after the grazing no-termination hard gates passes in
    25.16 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

41. Adaptive regular-root qualification now has its own similarity matrix,
    separate from the seam classifier's existing invariance corpus.  Each
    fixture constructs an exact `rt_ell_internal` sphere whose center and
    three radius vectors receive one common similarity transform, converts
    that implicit to BREP through the production conversion callback, and
    transforms the same off-center oblique lines and both ray directions.
    Model distance and squared-distance tolerances scale with the geometry.

    The matrix contains identity, pure translation, arbitrary-axis rotation
    plus translation, rotated/translated 0.01x scale, and rotated/translated
    10,000x scale.  Three lines in both directions give 30 rays and 60
    physical roots.  Every ray has one analytic, implicit, legacy-BREP, and
    prepared-BREP interval; normalization by the uniform scale recovers the
    same analytic sphere chord.  Every prepared result contains exactly two
    non-contact event groups, matches both legacy root/event classes, and
    produces one final interval without workspace, trace, or partition
    mismatch.

    All 60 roots pass strict-interior Krawczyk qualification before fixed
    depth, at depths 4 through 9.  Subdivision work deliberately is not
    required to be invariant: rays visit 27 through 67 boxes, 1,602 in total.
    This proves the relevant distinction directly.  Physical classification
    and normalized partitions are similarity invariants; ray-plane basis
    selection and floating-point interval conditioning may change traversal
    effort.  Maximum normalized analytic endpoint errors are approximately
    4.62e-14 for the implicit, 2.87e-7 for the legacy BREP path, and 2.23e-8
    for the prepared path, all below the scaled model-tolerance gate.

    Nonuniform scaling is still not claimed invariant.  It changes a sphere
    into an ellipsoid and changes normal/metric conditioning, so it belongs in
    a separate affine fixture.  Similarity success also does not replace the
    pending interval-enclosure audit or authorize production tree reduction.

    The focused normal gate passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray at 10.14 seconds.
    The focused ASan/UBSan gate passes 12/12 in 36.26 seconds, with
    rt_brep_ray at 36.22 seconds and no sanitizer diagnostic.

42. The function/Jacobian arithmetic layer of the provisional Krawczyk test
    now has an independent enclosure audit.  Scalar double evaluation of
    F(x) plus a post hoc magnitude estimate has been removed.  Each uncertain
    Bernstein coefficient begins as an outward interval, and tensor de
    Casteljau evaluation uses outward interval scaling and addition at every
    level.  Derivative Bernstein coefficients are likewise formed as
    intervals before their convex hulls are taken.  Krawczyk matrix products
    use the same outward interval multiplication.

    Primitive interval operations now expand each computed endpoint by one
    `nextafter` step instead of adding a fixed `128 epsilon * max(1, |x|)`
    margin.  The old absolute floor was conservative but destroyed binary
    scale covariance for small coefficients.  One outward representable step
    around each finite IEEE operation encloses its exact result regardless of
    whether the active rounding mode rounded that operation up or down.  All
    nonfinite results remain rejection paths.

    A private librt test hook publishes only the computed function, Jacobian,
    and product intervals.  The independent C++ oracle represents generated
    coefficients as exact signed dyadics, evaluates their tensor midpoint by
    exact integer addition and exponent adjustment, and computes derivative
    control coefficients exactly.  It then verifies that production
    intervals contain the nominal value plus the complete declared
    coefficient uncertainty.  This avoids relying on the implementation's
    own scalar evaluator as its oracle.

    Every tensor order pair from 2x2 through the supported 16x16 maximum is
    covered at binary exponents -400, -40, 0, 40, and 400.  Mixed-sign nets
    force cancellation.  The permanent gate checks 1,125 nets, 2,250 function
    intervals, 324,000 derivative coefficients, and 45 signed interval
    products.  Maximum function interval width is 1.00001197 times the exact
    propagated coefficient-uncertainty width, well inside the 1.05 guard.

    This completes only one proof layer.  The initial homogeneous ray-plane
    coefficient construction, arbitrary sub-box de Casteljau restriction
    error, rational weight/ray-t intervals, and outside-span
    reparameterization amplification still require independent enclosure
    audits.  Until those are complete, a successful Krawczyk result remains
    shadow evidence and cannot change production hit publication or tree
    density.

    All existing physical results remain unchanged: the ordinary sphere and
    similarity matrices qualify at depths 4 through 9, both grazing matrices
    qualify zero boxes early, and prepared partitions retain one improvement
    with zero regressions or ambiguous changes.  The focused normal gate
    passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray at 10.36 seconds.  The focused ASan/UBSan
    gate passes 12/12 in 37.29 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 37.25 seconds and
    no sanitizer diagnostic.

43. Initial homogeneous coefficient construction, arbitrary in-span
    restriction, and rational ray-t bounding now use the same operation-level
    outward intervals as the function/Jacobian layer.  Each stored binary64
    control component, weight, ray origin, direction, and ray-plane component
    begins as a point interval.  The implementation encloses `cv - origin*w`,
    both plane dot products, the ray-direction squared norm, and the ray-t
    numerator quotient at every arithmetic operation.  The existing scalar
    coefficients remain deterministic working centers, but their one common
    error per net is derived from the full interval hull rather than a
    coefficient-magnitude heuristic.  Stored positive weights are exact
    inputs and therefore begin with zero error.

    Every scalar tensor restriction now has a parallel interval de Casteljau
    restriction.  It starts from each complete center-plus-error coefficient
    interval, encloses the local minimum/maximum ratio used by the second
    split, and derives one common output error only after all restricted
    coefficient intervals exist.  This replaces the former
    `(1 + 8*depth)` error growth and `128*epsilon*max(1,magnitude)` addition.
    The same bounded restriction is applied independently to the homogeneous
    ray numerator and weight nets.  A weight interval reaching zero rejects
    the ray-t certificate; otherwise outward interval division supplies each
    rational coefficient bound and their hull supplies the box's t range.

    The exact-dyadic oracle now restricts tensor nets independently with exact
    half splits at three multi-split sub-box locations.  It covers both mixed-
    sign coefficient patterns, all order pairs from 2x2 through 16x16, five
    binary scales from exponent -400 through 400, and positive input
    uncertainty.  All 546,750 restricted coefficients enclose the exact
    nominal restricted value plus the full original uncertainty.  Maximum
    output width is 1.00003862 times that uncertainty, below the 1.05 guard.
    A separate gate checks 162 exact initial plane/ray coefficients across
    coordinate, direction, and plane scales, and 36 positive-denominator
    interval quotients.  Together with Finding 42, the audit now performs
    873,243 permanent enclosure checks before the ray corpus.

    Tighter proven hulls reject three legacy-only candidate clusters on
    representable miss-side sphere lines which the former heuristics retained.
    All three are analytically outside the sphere, produce zero implicit and
    production segments, lie within 0.1 T in ray parameter of tangency, and
    have grazing normal dot products.  The corpus reports unmatched legacy
    clusters as raw/accepted/invalid and permits only this narrow oracle-
    proven class; any invalid unmatched cluster is a hard failure.  Prepared
    sphere candidates fall from 324 to 296 and physical clusters from 111 to
    107 without changing a final partition.  This is a rigorous exclusion of
    numerical miss-side ambiguity, not crack closure or relaxed hit handling.

    The physical similarity contract remains unchanged.  Identity,
    translation, arbitrary rotation, 0.01x, and 10,000x cases still preserve
    normalized analytic/implicit/legacy/prepared partitions, all 60 ordinary
    roots qualify at depths 4 through 9, and the 30 rays still visit 1,602
    boxes.  The grazing matrices continue to qualify zero boxes early and the
    fixed-depth sphere grazing traversal remains 12,384 boxes; the 71.7
    percent measured work reduction still applies only to regular transverse
    roots.

    This completes the interval input proof for ordinary in-span Krawczyk
    boxes.  Outside-span continuation reparameterization remains a distinct
    open audit because extrapolating Bernstein transforms are not convex
    restrictions.  No production SurfaceTree density or published hit path
    changes in this checkpoint.  The focused normal gate passes 13/13 in
    13.88 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 12.58 seconds.  The focused ASan/UBSan
    gate passes 12/12 in 54.91 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 54.87 seconds and
    no sanitizer diagnostic.

44. Outside-span Bernstein reparameterization now has operation-level
    enclosures and an independent exact audit.  The former implementation
    computed a scalar infinity norm from transformed basis vectors, multiplied
    inherited errors by the tensor norm, and added a magnitude-based epsilon
    estimate for transformation roundoff.  Although the norm correctly
    described exact input-error amplification, the scalar transformation
    itself had no independently proven rounding enclosure.

    The scalar transformed net remains the deterministic working center.  For
    its bound, each one-dimensional Bernstein transformation matrix is now
    constructed with outward interval de Casteljau operations, including the
    interval quotient used by both algebraic split branches.  The u/v tensor
    matrix is then applied directly to every complete source coefficient
    interval with outward products and sums.  The final common error is
    derived from all output intervals, and every transformed weight interval
    must remain strictly positive before a continuation certificate proceeds.

    Direct tensor application matters for quality as well as proof.  A trial
    that propagated uncertain controls through two sequential interval split
    nets retained false correlations: even the linear [2,3] extrapolation
    enlarged the exact 5E input uncertainty to 7E, and the factor could
    compound with degree.  Building interval transformation matrices from
    exact basis vectors and applying the tensor operator once removes that
    dependency blow-up while still enclosing matrix-construction roundoff.

    The independent oracle performs exact-dyadic de Casteljau transforms and
    obtains exact input-uncertainty bounds from absolute u/v operator row
    sums.  Four large cases cover extension below zero, above one, the
    alternate minimum-equals-one split branch, an interval wholly above one
    with a negative intermediate denominator, and identity in one direction.
    They exercise both mixed-sign nets, all 2x2 through 16x16 order pairs, and
    exponents -400, -40, 0, 40, and 400.  A fifth seam-sized
    [-1/1024,1] x [0,1025/1024] case covers exact combined degrees through six;
    larger exact dyadic denominators exceed the fixed 64-bit oracle workspace,
    while the large integer-parameter cases continue to cover every supported
    order.

    All 730,550 transformed coefficient checks contain the exact nominal
    value plus its complete operator-amplified input uncertainty.  Maximum
    common-error width is 1.01298951 times the exact maximum uncertainty,
    below the 1.05 efficiency guard.  Combined with Findings 42 and 43, the
    permanent arithmetic audit now contains 1,603,793 enclosure checks.

    All 15 authorized bowed-Cobb continuation repairs remain certified and
    match the implicit sphere oracle.  Certificate maximum work remains 93
    boxes with stack high-water 20; maximum t-cluster width changes only from
    approximately 3.46262659e-5 to 3.46262648e-5 mm.  Identity, rigid,
    0.01x, and 10,000x classification and published partitions are unchanged.
    Ordinary similarity roots still qualify at depths 4 through 9 and grazing
    roots still qualify zero boxes early.  No SurfaceTree density changes in
    this checkpoint.  The focused normal gate passes 13/13 in 25.64 seconds,
    with rt_brep_ray at 24.37 seconds.  The focused ASan/UBSan gate passes
    12/12 in 93.19 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 93.15 seconds and no sanitizer
    diagnostic.

45. Conservative Bernstein clipping now reduces ordinary shadow isolation
    work without changing published hits or SurfaceTree density.  For each
    parameter direction, each ray-plane equation is reduced to lower and
    upper univariate coefficient envelopes over the other parameter.  A root
    must lie where the lower Bernstein curve can be nonpositive and the upper
    curve can be nonnegative.  Fixed control-polygon halfspace bounds include
    every eligible vertex and every pairwise zero crossing using outward
    interval arithmetic.  Scanning non-hull chords may enlarge the parameter
    range but cannot remove a valid root.

    The ranges from both equations are intersected in U and V.  Empty or
    inconclusive results do not exclude a box in this checkpoint.  A proposed
    contraction is re-restricted from the complete prepared coefficient net;
    restriction failure or a contradictory hull result restores the original
    box.  No clipping path allocates.  Trace accounting reports attempts,
    accepted U/V contractions, inconclusive results, restriction failures,
    and maximum removed width.

    Two numerical guards were required.  Each clip retains at least half of
    each parameter width and ignores removal below 1/16.  A contraction is
    charged one or two subdivision levels according to retained parameter
    area and capped at depth 24.  Without depth charging, repeated clipping
    narrowed boxes far beyond the old depth-24 resolution, outran corrector
    accuracy, and exposed non-progressing midpoint subdivision.  If neither
    midpoint is representably interior, the box now terminates conservatively
    rather than generating duplicate children.

    Continuation certificates intentionally retain the unclipped isolator.
    Trial clipping covered the intended continuation root but also retained
    extra conservative terminal boxes, violating the certificate's stronger
    requirement that its bounded region contain only that root component.
    This is an explicit promotion boundary rather than a loosened seam check.

    A private arithmetic gate covers 2,025 affine bivariate systems with known
    roots, positive coefficient uncertainty, every order pair from 2x2 through
    16x16, and binary scales 2^-200, 1, and 2^200.  Every clipped range contains
    the known root and contracts.  The complete 1,603,793 prior arithmetic
    gates and the new clipping gate pass before the geometry corpus.

    On the 30-ray similarity matrix, all 60 ordinary roots still qualify at
    depths 4 through 11 and normalized analytic/implicit/legacy/prepared
    partitions are unchanged.  Subdivision visits fall from the recorded
    no-clipping 1,602 boxes to 964 (39.8 percent).  The complete signed sphere
    grazing sequence, exact tangent, mirrored miss-side sequence, and bowed
    Cobb seam matrix pass with zero clipping restriction failures; grazing
    boxes receive no Krawczyk early termination.  The full direct ray corpus
    passes.  The focused normal gate passes 13/13 in 25.30 seconds, with
    rt_brep_ray at 24.07 seconds.  The focused ASan/UBSan gate passes 12/12 in
    91.04 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 91.00 seconds and no sanitizer
    diagnostic.  Production ordinary hits still come only from the
    depth-eight SurfaceTree path.

46. Completely certified ordinary prepared partitions now have a production
    publication path.  It is deliberately fail-closed: the BREP must be a
    solid and not a plate; every face and span must be supported and fully
    accounted; every retained box must be stored, Krawczyk-certified, and
    covered by a corrected root from the same face/span; and no surface,
    clipping, root, trim, cluster, or hit workspace may fail or overflow.
    Reconstructed events must be unambiguous ENTERING or LEAVING events and
    must clean to a finite, alternating, even partition with no sub-tolerance
    segment.  Clean trimmed misses are allowed; contacts, tangencies, odd
    partitions, and all incomplete evidence fall back.

    Thirteen observable outcomes distinguish selection from non-solid, plate,
    unsupported-surface, surface-workspace/restriction, surface-box-capacity,
    uncertified-root, local-workspace/trim, root-coverage, event-class,
    hit-construction, hit-workspace, and final-partition fallback.  Production
    returns a qualified fixed-workspace partition before SurfaceTree traversal.
    Otherwise it executes the existing dense-tree solver unchanged.  Plate,
    non-solid, and unsupported-face checks occur before prepared
    isolation, so those object modes do not pay for a solve merely to report
    their fallback.  Trace mode intentionally runs the legacy solver even
    after qualification so all prior event and partition comparisons remain
    live, then returns the prepared answer.  A private test entry forces legacy
    dispatch and prevents the promoted path from serving as its own oracle.

    Six oblique interior sphere rays qualify and match the analytic implicit,
    promoted production, forced legacy, and reconstructed prepared paths to
    the model tolerance.  The 30-ray similarity gate applies identity,
    translation, arbitrary-axis rotation, 0.01x scale, and 10,000x scale.  All
    60 roots qualify, all 30 partitions are selected, and the maximum
    normalized errors are 4.62e-14 implicit, 1.08e-8 production, 2.87e-7
    forced legacy, and 1.08e-8 reconstructed prepared.  Thus classification
    and normalized hit locations are invariant for tested similarities when
    model-space tolerances scale as lengths.  Finding 47 supplies the separate
    nonuniform affine ellipsoid qualification.

    The signed grazing matrix and exact tangent do not qualify: they report
    the explicit uncertified-root fallback and retain the legacy result.  In
    accumulated trace observations, the sphere interior selects 6/6 attempts,
    the broader sphere matrix selects 58/119 with 61 uncertified fallbacks,
    and the bowed Cobb matrix selects 102/416 with 314 uncertified fallbacks.
    The complete Crofton, CSG-leaf, similarity, classifier, metadata, and Cobb
    corpus passes without a partition delta.

    This is a correctness checkpoint, not yet a performance win.  The normal
    focused gate passes 13/13 with rt_brep_ray at 68.99 seconds; the previous
    shadow-only checkpoint took 24.07 seconds.  Some increase is independent
    test duplication, but production now also attempts prepared isolation on
    every BREP ray and grazing rays pay for that attempt before fallback.  The
    ASan/UBSan gate passes 12/12 in 361.99 seconds with rt_brep_ray at 361.95
    seconds and no diagnostic.  Do not lower SurfaceTree density or claim a
    throughput improvement until selection/fallback profiling supplies a
    lower-cost dispatch strategy or an adequate replacement for dense-tree
    fallback.

47. Ordinary prepared-root publication is now qualified under nonuniform
    affine sphere-to-ellipsoid transforms, with the high-condition fallback
    boundary retained as a permanent ratchet.  Each fixture applies
    A = R diag(sx, sy, sz) plus translation to a known sphere and its ray.  A
    transformed ray is normalized for shooting, and its analytic entry/exit
    parameters are the original chord parameters multiplied by |A d|.  This
    gives a direct oracle rather than a second numerical ellipsoid solve.

    The implicit ELL is formed from the three transformed radius vectors and
    independently converted to BREP.  Both ray directions compare the exact
    chord, implicit ELL, promoted production BREP, forced legacy BREP, and the
    reconstructed prepared physical partition.  Model distance tolerance is
    scaled by the minimum principal scale, which is the conservative scalar
    choice for the thinnest ellipsoid direction; endpoint errors are normalized
    by |A d|.  The six transforms include oblate and triaxial forms, arbitrary
    rotation and translation, principal scales from 0.001 through 2,500, and
    singular-value condition numbers from 1.67 through 1,000.

    All 36 production and forced-legacy rays produce the same one-segment
    implicit-oracle partition.  Twenty-eight rays publish the prepared result.
    At condition 100, one of three directions reaches the conservative depth
    limit in both ray directions and reports uncertified fallback.  At
    condition 1,000, two directions exceed the 64-box prepared trace capacity
    and one remains uncertified, again in both directions.  The latter middle
    direction also intersects 197 dense SurfaceTree leaves: trace mode records
    the 128-leaf fixed-workspace overflow and allocating-list fallback, while
    production remains identical to the forced legacy and implicit answers.
    Thus neither prepared nor legacy fixed capacity silently truncates an
    extreme ellipsoid.

    Across the 36 rays, all 72 intended roots receive a Krawczyk certificate
    somewhere in the retained subdivision, at certificate depths 5 through
    19.  Total subdivision visits are 16,860, with 15 minimum and 3,096 maximum
    per ray.  Maximum normalized endpoint errors are 2.20e-12 implicit,
    5.94e-8 production, 9.61e-8 forced legacy, and 5.94e-8 selected prepared.
    The summary hard-gates 28 selections, four surface-box fallbacks, and four
    uncertified fallbacks.  A new `--affine-only` mode runs this matrix directly
    for fast conditioning work.

    The focused affine gate passes in both optimized and ASan/UBSan builds with
    no sanitizer diagnostic.  The complete normal gate passes 13/13 in 69.56
    seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 69.52 seconds.  A full ASan/UBSan 12/12 run
    before extending the condition sweep passed in 359.82 seconds; the final
    condition-1,000 additions are covered by the focused sanitizer run.  This
    finding does not claim affine grazing or seam invariance: those need a
    separately mapped tangent-limit trend with anisotropic tolerance analysis.

48. The mapped affine grazing trend is now an executable ratchet, and it
    proves that the current classifiers are not yet fully affine invariant at
    the tangent limit.  The gate reuses the analytic sphere line and maps both
    its closest point and direction through A = R diag(sx, sy, sz) plus
    translation.  It shoots the triaxial, condition-100, and condition-1,000
    ellipsoids in both directions at signed base-sphere clearances
    h/T = 100, 1, 0.01, 1e-4, 1e-6, 1e-8, 0, and the six mirrored negative
    values.  This is 78 directed rays.  The exact base chord is multiplied by
    |A d| and divided by the model tolerance scaled by the smallest principal
    scale; endpoint errors are normalized back by |A d|.  Thus the oracle
    measures physical material at the thinnest modeled scale rather than a
    fixed angle or an untransformed parameter distance.

    The first run found a classification defect after successful root solve.
    At increasingly anisotropic grazes the legacy solver had two clean,
    correctly ordered roots, but both normal dot products fell below the fixed
    BREP_GRAZING_DOT_TOL.  Cleanup deleted the roots even when their physical
    chord was tens, hundreds, or thousands of model tolerances long.  A fixed
    angular cutoff is not affine invariant: an affine distortion can make the
    endpoint normals arbitrarily close to perpendicular without eliminating
    the material between the endpoints.

    Grazing cleanup now distinguishes an isolated contact from a resolved
    solid interval.  A nearly perpendicular hit is retained when it belongs
    to an adjacent, finite, untrimmed-or-authorized, ordered ENTERING/LEAVING
    pair whose ray-parameter separation is at least
    rti_tol.dist/|ray direction|, with only a scale-aware floating-point slack.
    Invalid trimmed and out-of-bounds candidates are still removed.  The same
    rule is used by the allocation-free cleanup, the legacy list cleanup, the
    prepared-event shadow, and prepared production qualification, so fixed and
    allocating paths remain equivalence-gated.  Exact contacts and
    sub-tolerance slivers may still collapse.  This change restores 16 of the
    initially missing directed affine grazing partitions.

    The resulting trend has no reversal mismatch and no hit/miss restart as h
    approaches zero.  All six transformed rays hit at h/T = 100, 1, 0.01, and
    1e-4.  Four of six hit at 1e-6 and zero hit at 1e-8.  The corresponding
    analytic chord ranges, in transformed model tolerances, are
    4.24e4--3.05e6, 4.25e3--3.05e5, 425--3.05e4, 42.5--3.05e3,
    4.25--305, and 0.425--30.5.  The triaxial condition-13.3 case is resolved
    through h/T = 1e-6 and its next miss has only a 0.425-T chord.  The
    condition-100 case still misses both directions at h/T = 1e-8 despite a
    3.08-T chord.  The condition-1,000 case still misses both directions at
    h/T = 1e-6 and 1e-8 despite 305-T and 30.5-T chords.  Those six resolved
    misses occur before hit construction: the old solver stores no roots and
    the prepared path reaches hundreds of uncertified/overflowed boxes without
    a publishable local root.  They are a solver/isolation problem, distinct
    from the corrected angular-cleanup problem.

    The gate therefore enforces monotone capability floors of h/T = 1e-6,
    1e-6, and 1e-4 for conditions 13.3, 100, and 1,000, respectively, while
    allowing closer cases and the aggregate six-resolved-miss count only to
    improve.  Production and forced legacy topology must match, every retained
    endpoint must satisfy the analytic tolerance, both ray directions must
    agree, negative clearances must miss, and prepared overflow/fallback must
    remain explicit.  This records a bounded known gap without blessing the
    gap as the desired final answer.

    Exact transformed tangency also revealed that the implicit ELL is not a
    reliable binary oracle exactly on the discriminant: three of six directed
    shots return tiny, direction-dependent contact slivers from affine
    floating-point cancellation, while the analytic oracle and BREP both
    classify all six as no material.  Positive and negative clearances still
    use the implicit result as an independent comparison, but exact contact is
    judged analytically.  This is relevant to later Cauchy-Crofton work:
    tangencies have measure zero in the estimator, but directed tangent tests
    must not silently treat an implicit numerical artifact as ground truth.

    The optimized `--affine-only` gate, the complete `rt_brep_ray` corpus, and
    the focused ASan/UBSan `--affine-only` gate pass.  The full normal corpus
    ends with `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`; the sanitizer run uses
    halt-on-error and reports no diagnostic.  The focused implicit-to-BREP and
    NURBS regression gate passes 4/4.  The test output deliberately reports
    `resolved-gaps=6` rather than claiming complete affine grazing invariance.

49. Structured prepared-corrector outcomes now identify why the six affine
    grazing gaps remain.  Every bounded correction attempt records invalid
    input, evaluation failure, nonfinite arithmetic, degenerate normal,
    singular Jacobian, no improvement, iteration limit, or convergence.  A
    finite nonconverged local attempt also records its final projected
    residual divided by the same scale-aware acceptance bound used by the
    solver.  Trace consistency requires exactly one outcome per attempt,
    convergence counters to agree, and every recorded failed ratio to exceed
    one.  This instrumentation does not change a hit decision.

    With the normal 64-box trace capacity, all 576 local seeds for each missed
    affine case end in no improvement; none reaches the 24-iteration limit.
    The surface-stage attempts show the same pattern, plus a small number of
    singular Jacobians.  Controlled diagnostic builds established the
    following boundaries and were then restored to production constants:

      * Retaining 1,024 boxes instead of 64 lets the condition-100 case reach
        one of its two roots.  The other local basin stops with a residual
        about 3.2 times its acceptance bound.  The condition-1,000 cases retain
        all 546 terminal boxes but find no root; their closest failed residuals
        remain about 19 through 37 times the bound.

      * Raising subdivision depth from 24 to 32 and 40 does not recover a
        partition.  The extreme case grows from roughly 2,900 visits to 11,900
        and then 49,400 visits.  More isotropic subdivision is therefore an
        expensive repetition of the same ill-conditioned solve.

      * Increasing numerical acceptance from 32 to 1,024 evaluation ULPs, or
        similarly relaxing the old Utah solver, creates false outside/contact
        candidates and endpoint errors around 1e-4 where the analytic gate is
        around 1e-6.  Bypassing the Krawczyk requirement does not qualify the
        prepared answer: the independent complete-root-coverage gate rejects
        it.  Tolerance inflation is not a valid repair.

      * Adding deterministic seeds along the smallest-singular-vector
        direction to the old solver does not recover the pair.  A generic
        closest-point query also enters the wrong local basin on these
        ellipsoids, so neither experiment supplies a completeness argument.

    The evidence points to a fold rather than an iteration-budget problem.
    Near a generic tangent the weak reduced equation has the leading form
    a(q-q0)^2-epsilon: root separation, Jacobian conditioning, and normal/ray
    dot approach zero like sqrt(epsilon).  The next solver step should isolate
    the well-conditioned equation across bounded strips, bracket the weak
    direction on both sides of its fold, correct the roots in disjoint boxes,
    and use outward interval/Bernstein exclusion plus Krawczyk inclusion to
    account for the whole parent box.  Samples and an SVD may guide traversal
    but cannot authorize exclusion.  Exact contact, incomplete coverage, or
    fixed-workspace exhaustion must remain explicit conservative fallbacks.

50. A bounded diagnostic prototype gives positive evidence that the broader
    solver goal is tractable under the supported-patch, model-tolerance, and
    explicit-fallback contract.  Mapping the analytic root t values back into
    all retained boxes showed that the missing affine pair is not hidden in an
    arbitrary interior singularity.  Its two roots approach the ellipsoid's
    equatorial Bezier-span boundary from opposite sides: the relevant boxes
    are spans 6 and 7 meeting at v=0.5.  With unrestricted diagnostic storage,
    they appeared at box indices 64/65 of 104 for condition 100 and 206/207 of
    546 for condition 1,000.  The ordinary 64-box observation limit therefore
    did not even retain the relevant boxes before local correction.

    A locally invertible rotation of the two ray-plane equations, aligned to
    the dominant projected surface derivative, was then applied only as a
    conservative coefficient-hull exclusion test.  Each rotated coefficient
    was formed with the already outward interval addition/scaling operations.
    This reduced the false terminal ambiguity corridor from 104 and 546 boxes
    to exactly the two boundary-adjacent boxes.  Because F=0 implies M F=0 for
    any nonsingular finite 2x2 matrix M, the idea has a straightforward
    no-false-exclusion argument; at the prototype stage, a permanent
    implementation still needed a direct exact-dyadic enclosure gate for the
    new coefficient combinations and explicit telemetry before promotion.

    A second prototype solved the dominant rotated equation for the regular
    parameter at fixed values of the weak parameter, then bracketed the signed
    weak equation independently on each side of the span boundary.  It
    recovered two local roots in all four previously missed condition-1,000
    directed shots, including both h/T=1e-8 shots whose transformed analytic
    chord is 30.5 model tolerances.  Thus the roots are numerically recoverable
    without deeper global subdivision or tolerance inflation.  The
    condition-100 case produced three raw local observations because one
    existing Newton result and the two one-sided span results were not yet
    seam-deduplicated.

    The prototype was intentionally reverted after measurement.  Its roots
    were not published: strict Krawczyk inclusion on the original terminal
    boxes still fails as the roots approach their shared box boundary, and the
    production completeness gate correctly reports uncertified fallback.
    Promotion therefore requires smaller one-sided root boxes, conservative
    exclusion of every remaining rotated box, separate certification of each
    simple root, and topology-aware cross-span event deduplication.  Exact
    contact must remain ambiguous/fallback because strict regular-root
    certification is expected to fail at the double root.

    This narrows the tractability boundary.  Correct, substantially cheaper
    raytracing is a realistic engineering target for valid positive-weight
    patches within supported order, explicit model tolerances, fixed-workspace
    limits, and conservative fallback.  A universal exact, fixed-time,
    fixed-memory classifier for arbitrary rational surfaces, degenerate
    trims, and unspecified modeling intent is not a realistic target.  The
    project should continue to state the former contract explicitly rather
    than accidentally promising the latter.

51. The conditioned equation-hull exclusion from Finding 50 is now a
    permanent, allocation-free part of prepared surface isolation.  After the
    ordinary per-equation Bernstein hull retains a box, the implementation
    forms interval derivative hulls for both projected ray-plane equations.
    The midpoint column with the greater Euclidean magnitude supplies a local
    orthonormal equation basis.  Every transformed Bernstein coefficient is
    then formed from outward interval scaling and addition, including the
    complete inherited coefficient uncertainty.  A box is excluded only when
    one transformed coefficient hull proves that zero is absent.  A bad or
    nonfinite conditioning hint is inconclusive and retains the box; it cannot
    authorize exclusion.

    The safety property does not depend on the midpoint derivative being an
    accurate Jacobian estimate.  For every finite 2x2 matrix M, F=0 implies
    M F=0, so an outward enclosure of a transformed component that omits zero
    proves that the original system has no root in the box.  The derivative
    column only selects a useful search basis.  This deliberately gives the
    rotation less authority than the interval coefficient arithmetic.

    A private exact-dyadic gate now audits arbitrary two-equation linear hulls
    at every supported tensor order from 2x2 through 16x16.  Four signed
    integer matrices, transform exponents -100, 0, and 100, and coefficient
    exponents -400, -40, 0, 40, and 400 exercise 2,187,000 transformed
    coefficients.  Each observed lower and upper bound must enclose the exact
    nominal value plus declared uncertainty, and an observed exclusion may
    occur only when the exact hull also excludes zero.  A new
    `--interval-only` test mode runs this arithmetic gate without constructing
    the ray corpus.

    The permanent exclusion reproduces the diagnostic localization: each of
    the six unresolved high-condition affine grazing shots now retains at
    most two terminal boxes and performs at least one rotated-hull exclusion.
    It does not publish an uncertified root, and the production hit results
    remain unchanged.  On the 36 ordinary affine shots, all 36 now select the
    prepared result with no fallback through condition 1,000.  Surface-box
    visits fall from 16,860 to 970, a 94.2 percent reduction, with 446
    exclusions in 920 rotated-hull attempts and no inconclusive arithmetic.
    The normal sphere, seam, crack, trim, Cobb, affine-grazing, and
    Cauchy-Crofton gates preserve their prior classifications and partitions;
    the complete corpus still ends with `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`.
    Focused optimized and ASan/UBSan `--affine-only` and `--interval-only`
    runs pass without a sanitizer diagnostic.  Certification, full local
    coverage, and cross-span deduplication remain prerequisites for promoting
    the recovered fold roots.

52. A second bounded fold experiment narrows the remaining proof and
    precision requirements without changing production behavior.  On each of
    the two boundary-adjacent boxes for every one of the six unresolved affine
    rays, a nine-sample regular/weak decomposition found a scalar sign bracket
    and converged it with fixed bisection.  All twelve expected local
    candidates were recovered with transformed residuals between zero and
    about 2e-16.  Their nearest parent-boundary distances were 0.00176 through
    0.0257 of the relevant box width, so the candidates were not numerical
    artifacts placed exactly on the shared span boundary.

    Strict Krawczyk trials on candidate-centered anisotropic boxes exposed the
    actual precision limit.  The normalized midpoint-Jacobian determinant
    ratios were about 1.25e-7 for condition 100 and 4.4e-8 through 4.6e-7 for
    condition 1,000.  Patch-wide common coefficient errors could not certify
    any of the twelve roots.  Fused `CV-origin*weight` construction, fused dot
    accumulation, one-sided error-free-transform envelopes, and preservation
    of individual coefficient intervals instead of collapsing them to the
    worst patch-wide error allowed binary64 interval Krawczyk to certify both
    condition-100 candidates and one side of each condition-1,000 h/T=1e-6
    pair.  A provisional outward long-double path certified both sides of the
    latter pair on this platform.  Neither binary64 nor the 64-bit-mantissa
    long-double path certified the condition-1,000 h/T=1e-8 pair; its analytic
    chord is nevertheless 30.5 model tolerances and therefore cannot be
    dismissed as a minimum-size contact.

    Root existence is only part of publication.  The experiment also tested a
    fold-specific uniqueness argument.  If the dominant transformed equation
    is strictly monotone in the regular parameter, has opposite signs on its
    two regular boundaries, and the Bernstein polynomial for the projected
    Jacobian determinant is one-signed, the implicit regular-equation corridor
    has at most one crossing.  Krawczyk existence then makes that root unique
    in the parent.  When the parent touches the zero-determinant fold boundary,
    an interval-excluded boundary strip can be removed before applying the
    same argument.  This certified one of the two parent boxes in each hard
    condition-100 shot and, after locally conditioning the strip exclusion,
    one parent in each condition-1,000 h/T=1e-6 shot.  The opposite parents
    remained inconclusive.  Generic complement subdivision was a poor
    substitute: even a 1,024-box allowance per parent exhausted while refining
    interval ambiguity next to the certified box.

    The experimental implementation was reverted after measurement.  It had
    no exact-dyadic audit for the new Bernstein-product determinant, no
    portable extended-precision contract, no complete two-parent coverage,
    and no cross-span event deduplication.  The evidence favors a small hybrid
    path: use conditioned hulls to localize the fold, bounded scalar brackets
    to propose both one-sided roots, per-coefficient or expansion arithmetic
    for certification, and a monotonic corridor/degree proof rather than a
    dense complement tiling.  Assemble every failed certificate and threshold
    case into a C/C++ solver corpus before further arithmetic changes.  An
    uncertified case must continue to use the existing fallback.

    This further supports tractability under the stated engineering contract.
    The search and candidate solve are already bounded and reliable on the
    known failures; the open work is a finite set of enclosure, uniqueness,
    and topology proofs.  It does not make arbitrary degenerate rational
    patches with unspecified tolerance intent into a tractable exact,
    fixed-resource problem, and the implementation should not promise that.

53. The first permanent focused fold-solver corpus now ratchets bounded
    candidate recovery independently of root certification and production hit
    publication.  A private allocation-free test entry reuses the same
    conditioned derivative frame as the production rotated-hull exclusion.
    It samples 17 ordered weak-parameter values, solves the regular equation
    with at most 56 bisections, bisects each weak sign bracket at most 64
    times, and stores at most four candidates in caller-provided fixed arrays.
    Exhaustion and all work counts are explicit.  The routine only proposes
    nominal roots; coefficient-error bounds do not turn it into an existence,
    uniqueness, or completeness certificate.

    The analytic tensor-product system is

      phi(u,v) = u - 0.37
      psi(u,v) = (v - 0.5)^2 - epsilon.

    For positive epsilon, its two roots have prescribed separation
    2*sqrt(epsilon).  The permanent matrix sweeps separations 2^-4 through
    2^-24, exact contact at epsilon=0, and a strict miss at negative epsilon.
    Five exact binary equation bases cover identity, equation exchange, sign
    reversal, and diagonal/off-diagonal scale ratios of 2^200.  Five parameter
    variants cover reversal of either coordinate, exchange of u and v, and a
    combined exchange/reversal.  The result is 200 systems with 325 expected
    roots.  Candidate count, one-to-one analytic location, normalized
    residual, bracket count, the fixed 17 samples, a 147-solve theoretical
    ceiling, capacity, and frame availability are all hard gates.  The first
    optimized run found every root through 5.96046448e-8 separation with zero
    represented location/residual error and used at most 61 regular solves.

    This corpus also records an important scope boundary.  A derivative-only
    orthogonal equation frame is invariant to signed permutation and wide
    independent binary scaling, but it does not undo an arbitrary shear that
    hides a large multiple of the weak equation in the regular equation.
    Non-dyadic equation mixing can also perturb or numerically split an exact
    double root below coefficient precision.  Such cases need explicit
    input/construction-error envelopes and stronger rank-revealing or
    coefficient-aware conditioning before they can be claimed as invariants;
    loosening the root-location tolerance would hide the issue.  The
    production hull exclusion remains safe for every finite mixing matrix
    because transformed hulls have exclusion authority only when their
    outward intervals omit zero.  Candidate recovery has no such authority.

    Factoring the production frame construction into the shared helper leaves
    all prior hull decisions unchanged.  Focused optimized `--fold-only`,
    `--interval-only`, and `--affine-only` gates pass.  The ordinary affine
    baseline remains 36/36 selected, 970 surface boxes, and 446 exclusions in
    920 rotated-hull attempts; the six known grazing gaps are unchanged.  The
    next promotion step is therefore not more sampling.  It is exact-audited
    per-coefficient construction plus complete one-sided existence/uniqueness
    proofs for both hard span parents and physical cross-span deduplication.

54. The arithmetic and synthetic-proof layer needed by that next step is now
    permanent but still has no production publication authority.  A fixed
    Bernstein tensor-product operator forms interval control coefficients for
    each product in

      det(J) = phi_p psi_q - phi_q psi_p

    before subtracting them.  Derivative coefficients retain individual
    intervals.  Each product coefficient uses the exact Bernstein degree-
    elevation weights, with the rational binomial ratios themselves enclosed
    by outward interval division and multiplication.  Surface orders through
    16x16 produce determinant orders through 30x30 in caller-bounded storage;
    nonfinite arithmetic or an unsupported order is inconclusive.

    The independent oracle does not approximate those rational coefficients
    by resampling.  It accumulates their integer numerators with the exact
    binomial weights, divides once in long-double only to compare the final
    rational value, and uses dyadic input scaling.  It gates 172,800 nominal
    determinant coefficients over every input order from 2x2 through 16x16 at
    scales 2^-200, 1, and 2^200.  All 172,800 have a strict observed sign and
    enclose the exact value.  A second exact integer-interval oracle applies
    independent, coefficient-varying uncertainty through order 8x8 and gates
    9,408 additional lower/upper enclosures at the same scales.  This closes
    the missing Bernstein-product audit identified in Finding 52; it does not
    yet close the separate fused ray-plane coefficient-construction audit.

    A per-coefficient Krawczyk qualification path now also removes the fixed
    1e-6 determinant-ratio rejection from the proof decision.  The computed
    inverse is only a finite point preconditioner: Krawczyk remains valid for
    any such approximate matrix because outward intervals enclose every
    product with F and J.  Strict containment of the resulting image, not a
    condition-number guess, is authoritative.  Singular, nonfinite, or
    non-contained cases remain uncertified.  This distinction is important:
    poor conditioning may make the enclosure fail, but a fixed angular cutoff
    must not reject a proof that the enclosure actually establishes.

    The focused fold corpus adds 36 candidate-centered root boxes: both sides
    of separations 2^-4 through 2^-24 under parameter shears 1, 2^10, and
    2^20.  All 36 have strict Krawczyk inclusion.  Twenty-four lie below the
    old 1e-6 cutoff, and the smallest normalized determinant ratio is about
    5.68e-14.  The root boxes narrow in the weak direction as shear grows so
    coefficient magnitude does not swamp the small local residual.  An
    initial fixed relative width failed the larger shear cases even when their
    determinant ratio was less extreme; that useful failure shows that local
    aspect ratio and coefficient-roundoff control are part of the proof, not
    performance-only tuning.

    Each root certificate is paired with a larger one-sided corridor for the
    same analytic system.  A fixed interval test proves that phi_p excludes
    zero, phi has strict opposite signs on its two p boundaries for all q, and
    every Bernstein coefficient of det(J) has the expected side sign.  These
    three facts make the regular-equation locus continuous and single-valued
    and make psi strictly monotone along it.  Krawczyk existence in the nested
    root box therefore establishes exactly one root in each of the 36 tested
    corridors, rather than merely converging to a candidate.  Exact contact
    still has no strict determinant sign and is intentionally not certified.

    Optimized and ASan/UBSan `--fold-only` and `--interval-only` gates pass;
    the complete optimized ray/Crofton corpus again ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`.  Production hit behavior is
    unchanged.  Promotion against the six real affine misses still requires
    interval-preserving fused ray-plane coefficient construction and
    restriction, proof or exclusion of the strip between each corridor and
    the fold boundary, qualification of both real span parents, and
    cross-span physical-event deduplication.

55. The real ray-plane interval plumbing and a permanent shadow fold probe
    now separate candidate discovery from the remaining precision failure.
    Each prepared span retains an outward interval for every ray-plane
    Bernstein coefficient, and those intervals follow the same outside-span
    reparameterization as the nominal coefficients.  Terminal candidate boxes
    are restricted directly from those original per-coefficient intervals;
    they are never widened into one patch-wide error first.  Centered
    homogeneous coordinates use a fused `CV-origin*weight` operation with one
    outward representable step, and the nominal ray and ray-plane dot products
    use fused accumulation.  The existing exact coefficient audit still
    passes.

    A new exact-dyadic restriction gate varies every source coefficient's
    uncertainty independently.  It covers every supported order pair, three
    quarter-grid sub-boxes, signed patterns, and the existing wide coefficient
    scales.  All 546,750 lower and 546,750 upper output bounds enclose the
    exact restricted values.  This closes the binary64 per-coefficient
    construction/restriction plumbing item; it does not establish that
    binary64 intervals are narrow enough for every grazing certificate.

    On each terminal adaptive box retained by the conditioned equation hull,
    a trace-only, allocation-free probe now runs the fixed 17-sample fold
    candidate solver.  It optionally applies at most twelve bounded nominal
    Newton steps to center the candidate, tries eight nested symmetric
    candidate boxes, restricts the original coefficient intervals directly,
    and applies the threshold-free interval Krawczyk test.  It records search,
    restriction, proof, determinant-ratio, and Krawczyk-image-excess telemetry.
    No outcome changes traversal, publishes a hit, or terminates production
    isolation.

    The result is decisive on the six known affine grazing gaps.  All twelve
    expected roots are recovered from the twelve terminal boxes, with two
    candidates and sixteen Krawczyk trials per forward/reverse hard shot, but
    none receives strict binary64 inclusion.  The condition-100 h/T=1e-8
    cases have minimum determinant ratios about 1.24e-7 to 1.26e-7 and best
    normalized image excesses 0.058 to 0.0663.  The condition-1,000 h/T=1e-6
    cases have ratios about 4.61e-7 to 4.62e-7 and excesses 0.337 to 0.365.
    At h/T=1e-8 the ratios fall to about 4.42e-8 to 4.47e-8 and the image
    excess rises to 40.9 through 41.5.  An anisotropic aspect-ratio grid and
    the nominal Newton refinement did not move this boundary; the grid was
    reverted because it only added work and reduced easier certificate
    counts.  The evidence therefore identifies enclosure precision, not root
    search, iteration count, or the old determinant threshold, as the next
    problem.

    The focused optimized and ASan/UBSan `--interval-only`, `--fold-only`, and
    `--affine-only` gates pass.  The interval audit reports 546,750 common-
    error and 546,750 per-coefficient restrictions; the fold corpus retains
    200 systems, 325 roots, 36 strict root certificates, and 36 uniqueness
    corridors.  The complete optimized ray/Cauchy-Crofton corpus ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`.  Production partitions and the six
    recorded grazing gaps remain unchanged.  Fused nominal arithmetic changes
    the ordinary affine diagnostic baseline by one conservative hull decision
    to 36/36 selected, 970 surface boxes, and 445 exclusions in 919 attempts.

    This also preserves the transformation contract established by the Cobb
    and analytic sphere gates.  Translation, arbitrary rigid rotation, and
    uniform scale are classifier similarities when geometry, rays, and every
    model-space length tolerance transform together; the current directed
    Cobb classifier and sphere solver matrices pass that invariant.  Keeping
    a fixed absolute tolerance while scaling the geometry is a different
    modeling contract and is not expected to be invariant.  Nonuniform scale
    is not a similarity, so it is tested separately through the analytic
    sphere-to-ellipsoid affine oracle.  Ordinary affine rays pass through
    condition 1,000, while the six tangent-limit gaps above prevent a broader
    affine-grazing invariance claim.

    The next arithmetic step is a portable fixed-size error-free expansion or
    equivalent rigorously outward precision tier, applied only to localized
    ambiguous boxes and checked against an independent exact oracle.  It must
    not rely on platform `long double`.  After it certifies the real roots,
    both adjacent span parents still need complete corridor/fold-boundary
    coverage and cross-span physical-event deduplication before production
    promotion.

56. A portable fixed-size expansion precision tier now implements the next
    arithmetic checkpoint without changing production authority.  Each
    expansion stores at most 128 binary64 components.  Error-free `TwoSum`
    addition and an FMA residual for `TwoProduct` preserve the exact result of
    operations on the represented inputs.  Nonfinite arithmetic, a product
    whose residual could underflow below the representable binary64 expansion
    range, or capacity exhaustion returns inconclusive.  There is no heap
    allocation and no dependence on platform `long double`.

    Ray-plane coefficients are constructed as exact expansions of the
    represented operations in

      CV - origin * weight

    followed by each projected ray-plane dot product.  These bounds describe
    the exact equation defined by the stored binary64 CV, origin, and plane
    components; they do not claim that the binary64 plane-frame construction
    equals an ideal real-valued frame.  Expansion results are converted to an
    outward binary64 interval and intersected with the independently outward
    ordinary interval, so the shadow tier is never wider and cannot invent an
    exclusion or root if both arithmetic paths satisfy their contracts.

    Local restriction uses the tensor-product Bezier blossom directly.  An
    output coefficient with index i is the blossom with degree-i copies of
    the lower parameter endpoint and i copies of the upper endpoint.  This
    avoids the non-dyadic `a/b` division in a two-split restriction.  Each
    scalar equation is first normalized by an exactly represented power of
    two selected from its maximum coefficient magnitude.  Independent
    nonzero equation scaling preserves its zero set and greatly reduces
    underflow risk.  Full expansions are retained throughout the bounded
    blossom; an experiment that compacted after every interpolation was safe
    but did not improve a real certificate and was reverted.

    Expansion evaluation, derivative hulls, interval endpoint products, and
    the Krawczyk correction/remainder/image arithmetic use the same fixed
    representation.  Every expansion interval is intersected with the
    ordinary outward result.  Tight endpoint algebra did not add a real
    certificate beyond exact coefficient construction and restriction,
    indicating that the dominant remaining uncertainty is upstream geometry,
    candidate/proof-box layout, or the missing one-sided coverage theorem
    rather than the final Krawczyk additions and products.

    The permanent exact-oracle audit now reports:

      function       2,250 ordinary + 2,250 expansion checks
      derivative     324,000 + 324,000 checks, 2,250 contractions
      product        45 + 45 checks, all 45 contractions
      coefficient    162 ordinary + 108 expansion checks, all 108 contractions
      restriction    546,750 common-error + 546,750 per-coefficient
                     + 546,750 expansion checks, 544,500 contractions

    All observed expansion bounds enclose the exact oracle.  The largest
    expansion in these arithmetic gates uses four components; the product and
    coefficient gates use one.  Separate gates require conservative fallback
    for a product residual below the binary64 subnormal range and for a mixed-
    scale power-of-two normalization that cannot round-trip every nonzero
    endpoint exactly.  The synthetic fold corpus independently recertifies all
    36 roots with the expansion Krawczyk path, uses at most two components,
    and retains all 36 one-sided uniqueness corridors.

    On the six unresolved affine shots, the expansion path is available for
    all 96 attempted nested boxes with no failure.  It certifies both roots in
    each directed condition-100 h/T=1e-8 shot and one root in each directed
    condition-1,000 h/T=1e-6 shot: six of the twelve real candidates.  The
    per-shot certificate ratchet is therefore 2, 2, 1, 1, 0, 0.  The hardest
    condition-1,000 h/T=1e-8 pair remains uncertified, but its best normalized
    Krawczyk image excess falls from about 40.9--41.5 to 11.1--13.1.  Real
    expansion high-water is 17 of 128 components.  Increasing symmetric proof
    depth from eight to sixteen levels and adding a second weak-direction
    anisotropic mode produced no new certificates and were reverted.

    Exact transformed contact currently records two expansion certificates.
    Those equations are the exact equations of their represented binary64
    inputs, which may be slightly split by affine and frame construction; a
    numerical certificate must therefore not be confused with a physical
    ENTER/LEAVE interval.  Exact contact, minimum-size classification, parent
    completeness, and cross-span event identity remain separate gates.  The
    expansion path is consequently trace-only and cannot terminate traversal
    or publish a hit.

    The real affine ratchet permits a later production improvement to remove
    any of the six gaps.  While a gap exists it requires a recognized hard
    case, a nonzero expansion attempt count, complete availability, zero
    arithmetic failures, high-water below 128, the recorded certificate
    floor, and either a certificate or a strictly smaller image excess than
    binary64.  This prevents a fixed-this/broke-that precision regression
    without freezing the present miss count.

    Optimized `--interval-only`, `--fold-only`, `--affine-only`, and the full
    ray/Cauchy-Crofton corpus pass.  Focused ASan/UBSan builds pass the same
    three paths with no diagnostic; leak checking remains disabled because
    the host ptrace wrapper is incompatible with LeakSanitizer.  The full
    optimized corpus again ends with `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`, and
    production partitions remain unchanged.  The maximum-order blossom has
    a transient fixed stack cost on the order of 100 KiB, so stack use and
    execution cost must be profiled or moved into an existing bounded shot
    workspace before production promotion.

    This result reinforces the tractability boundary rather than closing the
    solver task.  Portable precision resolves half of the known real proof
    failures and materially contracts the rest.  More symmetric depth is not
    the next lever.  The next step is a one-sided corridor/fold-boundary strip
    proof using the conditioned regular/weak frame, with more faithful
    candidate-centered parameter geometry and, if still necessary, exact
    expansion propagation through the frame construction itself.  Both span
    parents and their intervening strips must be accounted for before the two
    observations can be deduplicated into a physical event.

57. The real one-sided corridor and fold-boundary strip theorem is now
    implemented as an allocation-free, trace-only proof.  The central
    decomposition is deliberately stronger than a grid of local root solves.
    In a candidate-conditioned equation frame, let phi be the regular
    equation and p its regular parameter.  The parent corridor first proves
    that phi_p has one strict sign and that phi has strict, opposed signs on
    the two p boundaries for every weak parameter q.  The implicit function
    is consequently one continuous p(q) graph crossing the whole weak
    interval.  The frame and the choice of p are nominal conditioning hints;
    only outward coefficient intervals authorize a proof.

    A full-corridor Bernstein sign for det(J) is still accepted when it is
    available, but it is unnecessarily strong near a fold.  The new bounded
    graph proof subdivides q, restricts the original coefficient intervals to
    each slab, and applies at most four interval-Newton contractions to phi in
    p.  It then requires one common strict determinant sign on the enclosure
    of phi=0 in every slab.  This is sufficient: psi is strictly monotone
    along the unique phi graph even if det(J) changes sign elsewhere in the
    two-dimensional corridor.  Restriction failure, nonfinite arithmetic,
    sign conflict, depth exhaustion, or fixed-workspace exhaustion is
    explicitly inconclusive.

    An important failed intermediate implementation recomputed det(J) after
    restricting and reparameterizing a very thin p interval.  Reparameterizing
    the equations multiplies the p derivatives, and hence the determinant, by
    the contracted interval width.  That artificial scale loss made a strict
    sign harder to prove as the graph enclosure improved.  The corrected path
    forms the determinant polynomial on the q slab before p contraction,
    tracks the contracted p range back in the original slab coordinates, and
    restricts that already-formed determinant polynomial to the range.  Its
    values and sign are preserved without the extra derivative scale factor.
    Power-of-two equation normalization remains a best-effort zero-set-
    preserving aid inside graph contraction, never an independent authority.

    The adjacent fold-boundary strip uses the same regular-graph contraction.
    It covers the weak interval with a fixed depth-eight binary traversal and
    proves on every contracted graph enclosure that either phi or psi has a
    coefficient hull excluding zero.  Thus no second system root lies between
    the certified corridor and its fold-side boundary.  The traversal uses a
    16-entry stack, a 511-box visit cap, fixed tensor arrays, and no allocation.
    Arithmetic, restriction, depth, and workspace failures have separate
    telemetry and retain the dense-tree fallback.  An exact-contact fixture
    intentionally reaches the depth bound and remains unexcluded, confirming
    that the path does not turn contact uncertainty into a material interval.

    The first whole-box hull chooses the regular/weak axis.  A
    candidate-Jacobian frame conditions the two equations, after which each
    real candidate tries the dyadic fractions 1/16, 1/8, 1/4, 3/8, 1/2, 5/8,
    3/4, and 7/8 between the candidate and its nearest weak boundary.  Direct
    restrictions always start from the original expansion coefficient
    intervals.  A complete shadow proof requires expansion Krawczyk existence,
    a unique one-sided corridor, and exclusion of the remaining fold strip.
    None of these outcomes yet terminates traversal or publishes a hit.

    The strengthened dyadic synthetic graph corpus has 72 corridor cases:
    six root separations, both sides, both parameter orientations, and
    independent equation scales 2^-100, 1, and 2^100.  A coupled term is large
    enough that the determinant has no strict sign on the whole corridor in
    every case.  Restriction to the contracted implicit graph recovers the
    expected strict sign in all 72, using 162 contractions.  Another 72
    root-free strip cases are all excluded, using 198 contractions, while the
    exact-contact case remains inconclusive.  The optimized fold summary is:

      graph=72/72/1 boxes=72/162+81/198 high=7

    where the first triplet is corridor/strip/contact case count and the two
    box pairs report determinant-graph and strip boxes/contractions.

    The determinant restriction itself has a new exact-dyadic enclosure gate.
    It covers every supported even determinant order from 2 through 30 in
    both tensor directions, all three half/quarter subintervals, scales
    2^-200, 1, and 2^200, plus the 30x30 maximum-order corner.  All 33,408
    checked output coefficients contain the exact restricted lower and upper
    controls.  The older complete determinant construction audits remain
    172,800 exact nominal coefficients plus 9,408 coefficient-varying interval
    cases.  This directly guards the corrected preserve-scale operation rather
    than relying only on a real-ray behavioral success.

    All six hard directed affine shots now permanently ratchet the proof path
    even if a later production fix eliminates their recorded miss.  Both
    condition-100 parents have complete existence, corridor uniqueness, and
    strip exclusion in each ray direction.  Every condition-1,000 candidate
    also has its unique corridor and both adjacent strips covered.  At h/T=
    1e-6, expansion Krawczyk existence still certifies only one of the two
    candidates per direction; at h/T=1e-8 it certifies neither.  The remaining
    per-shot complete-proof counts are therefore 2, 2, 1, 1, 0, 0 even though
    corridor and strip counts are 2/2 throughout.  This isolates the next
    blocker to candidate existence precision or upstream frame construction,
    not missing parent coverage.

    Optimized `--fold-only`, `--affine-only`, and `--interval-only` pass.  The
    independent fold and affine modes were run concurrently as separate
    processes; their optimized wall times are approximately 0.04 and 1.42
    seconds.  ASan/UBSan `--fold-only`, `--affine-only`, and `--interval-only`
    likewise pass when sharded as independent processes.  The full optimized
    corpus ends with `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`.  Process-level build
    and test parallelism is safe and useful now.  Shared-process parallelism
    remains a separate qualification task because OpenNURBS/model fixtures and
    global state must first be audited, and arithmetic counters must stay
    deterministic.

    Production behavior remains unchanged.  Finding 59 below supersedes the
    proposed frame-first next step by proving the remaining existence cases
    on the unique regular graph.  Only after cross-span event identity and
    minimum-segment/contact classification agree may the shadow event replace
    the dense-tree fallback.

58. A first exact-perpendicular ray-plane frame experiment was rejected and
    reverted after the new permanent ratchets exposed a trade rather than a
    monotone improvement.  The prototype selected the largest ray-direction
    component k, applied a common exact power-of-two scale, and formed the two
    algebraic normals

      n1[k] = -d[a], n1[a] = d[k]
      n2[k] = -d[b], n2[b] = d[k]

    for cyclic (k,a,b).  In exact real arithmetic both dot products with d
    vanish and n1 cross n2 equals d[k] d, avoiding the current Unitize/cross-
    product rounding.  This is still a useful construction for a future exact
    frame path.

    As a drop-in replacement, however, it reduced each directed condition-100
    expansion existence floor from two roots to one and changed several
    ordinary prepared-selector counts.  It removed the two transformed exact-
    contact expansion certificates and improved one hardest condition-1,000
    image excess from about 13.1 to 10.1, but the other remained about 11.7
    and neither hardest root certified.  The net result violated the existing
    affine ratchet and was reverted without a source change.

    This shows that exact ray-plane representation, equation conditioning, and
    candidate proof-box geometry are coupled.  Do not replace the frame on the
    strength of orthogonality alone.  A next experiment should retain the
    present floors, compare bounded exact algebraic pivot frames as shadow
    alternatives, and construct each candidate box in the selected frame's
    conditioning geometry.  Exact contact improving while ordinary roots
    regress is diagnostic evidence, not a promotion result.

59. All twelve known hard affine fold candidates now have complete shadow
    existence/uniqueness/strip proofs without changing production hit
    publication.  Two monotone additions closed the former existence gap.

    First, `brep_trace_expansion_krawczyk_contractions` turns an unsuccessful
    expansion Krawczyk image into a bounded contraction opportunity.  It
    intersects the outward image with [0,1]^2, maps the retained box outward
    into original span coordinates, restricts again from the original
    expansion-valued coefficient net, and retries at the new midpoint.  The
    loop has at most four attempts, fixed stack arrays, no allocation, and
    separate attempt/applied/empty-or-degenerate/unchanged/failure telemetry.
    A failed or unchanged contraction remains inconclusive.  This improves
    the six directed real-shot expansion certificate floors from
    2/2/1/1/0/0 to 2/2/2/2/0/0: both condition-1,000 h/T=1e-6 candidates now
    certify in each ray direction.  The h/T=1e-8 Krawczyk images are
    classified as unchanged and retain their existing 11--13 normalized
    excess; the ratchet intentionally permits that conservative outcome.

    Second, two-dimensional Krawczyk inclusion is no longer the sole
    existence theorem after a unique regular graph has been established.
    `brep_fold_graph_boundary_existence` takes the already-proved phi=0 graph
    p(q).  On q=0 and q=1 it uses bounded one-dimensional interval Newton to
    contract p around the unique phi root, restricting both expansion-valued
    boundary curves at every step.  A strict psi sign on each contracted
    endpoint enclosure, with opposite signs at the two q boundaries, proves
    existence by continuity.  The existing common strict det(J) sign on the
    graph makes psi strictly monotone and supplies uniqueness.  Exact
    singleton p contractions are evaluated directly.  A zero/uncertain psi
    endpoint, restriction/arithmetic failure, or unavailable graph remains
    inconclusive, so exact contact is not promoted to a crossing.

    The theorem is independently gated through `_rt_brep_fold_graph_test`.
    The exact-dyadic synthetic matrix reports endpoint existence available in
    all 145 cases.  It certifies all 72 root-bearing, whole-determinant-
    unsigned corridors and certifies none of the 72 root-free strips or the
    exact-contact case.  The aggregate is:

      graph=72/72/1 boxes=72/162+81/198 boundary=145/72/778 high=7

    Thus the positive and negative paths both cover axis interchange,
    separations through 2^-24, and independent equation scales 2^-100, 1,
    and 2^100.  The real affine ratchet requires two available and certified
    endpoint proofs, nonzero contractions, zero failures, both unique
    corridors, and both excluded fold strips for every hard shot.  Its
    complete-parent counts are now 2/2/2/2/2/2 even though the separately
    retained expansion Krawczyk floors are 2/2/2/2/0/0.

    This changes the next engineering boundary.  More frame precision may
    still improve numerical conditioning, but it is no longer required to
    prove these twelve roots.  The immediate solver task is to prove that the
    two adjacent-span observations denote one physical event, deduplicate
    them without erasing distinct close roots, and apply the model minimum-
    segment/exact-contact policy before any shadow result gains production
    authority.  The dense-tree fallback remains active until that work and
    its partition/Crofton gates are complete.

60. Cross-span fold events now have a conservative production path, and all
    six known tolerance-resolved affine grazing gaps are closed.

    A complete parent proof now stores one fixed-capacity fold-root record
    containing the face/span identity, nominal UV and ray parameter, localized
    UV box, rigorous outward ray-parameter interval, and determinant sign.
    `brep_trace_localize_fold_root` tries 24 dyadically shrinking slabs about
    the candidate in the weak parameter.  Every retained slab independently
    re-establishes the regular phi graph, proves endpoint existence, contracts
    the regular parameter, maps the enclosure back to the original span, and
    computes the rational ray-t hull.  The smallest certified hull is retained.
    This is fixed work with stack arrays and no shot-time allocation.  The six
    directed hard shots use 48 localization attempts apiece, certify 8--24
    nested ranges, and report zero localization failures.

    Candidate identity is topological rather than distance-only.  Two fold
    roots may pair only when they belong to the same face, lie on distinct
    Bezier spans sharing exactly one tensor-product boundary, and have
    overlapping domains in the transverse parameter.  The candidate graph
    must give both roots mutual degree one; corner and many-to-many cases are
    deliberately unsupported.  For the ray-plane frame used here the
    certified determinant sign is the sign of `(Su x Sv) dot D`; face reversal
    flips it.  A negative oriented sign is ENTERING and a positive sign is
    LEAVING.  Nominal surface normals are checked against that proof direction
    but are not used as an angular grazing threshold.  Same-direction roots
    with overlapping t hulls are duplicate observations.  Opposite directions
    give an ENTER/LEAVE material pair or LEAVE/ENTER void pair according to
    ray order.  Ambiguous topology, direction, or multiplicity falls back.

    The material-gap decision is rigorous and scale-aware.  Outward interval
    operations compute `tol->dist / |D|`, subtract the two localized t hulls,
    and use strict comparisons.  A gap whose lower bound exceeds the minimum-
    t upper bound is resolved; a gap whose upper bound is below the minimum-t
    lower bound is a subminimum contact; overlap with the decision boundary is
    tolerance-ambiguous.  `_rt_brep_fold_interval_test` and a 36-case private
    matrix permanently gate resolved, subminimum, straddling-ambiguous, and
    overlapping-contact behavior under 0.01x/10,000x model scaling and
    0.25x/16x non-unit ray-direction scaling.  Invalid intervals, zero
    direction, and negative tolerance reject.

    Production authorization is intentionally narrower than proof discovery.
    It requires exactly two terminal boxes, no ordinary Krawczyk roots, two
    complete parent/fold-strip proofs, one mutually unique resolved material
    pair, no duplicate/void/subminimum/ambiguous/unmatched event, no arithmetic,
    localization, capacity, direction, or trim failure, and two CLEAN_HIT
    classifications strictly inside the face trims.  Every local-corrector
    observation must either match a fold t hull or be a single collapsed
    observation on one of the two adjacent spans inside the certified pair
    hull.  Any unrelated local root forces fallback.  The two proven hits are
    published directly, so the legacy normal-angle grazing cleanup cannot
    erase a rigorously resolved close pair.  Near-trim fold roots are not yet
    authorized; seam/crack policy remains independent and conservative.

    The condition-100 h/T=1e-8 pair exposed why the collapsed-local rule is
    necessary: its ordinary corrector reports one root between the two
    disjoint certified t intervals.  The two condition-1,000 h/T=1e-6 and two
    h/T=1e-8 directed cases have no local roots at all.  The strict fold path
    now publishes all six analytic intervals, matches both endpoint oracles
    within the scaled model tolerance, preserves ray reversal, and reduces
    the resolved-gap count from six to zero.  The signed sweep remains
    monotone: exact contact is not published, negative clearances remain
    misses, and positive chords below the model minimum are not claimed as
    material.  Dense SurfaceTree construction and every fallback population
    remain unchanged pending the broader corpus and performance gates.

61. The monolithic BREP ray correctness executable is now process-sharded at
    its safe semantic boundaries.  CTest registers six deterministic entries:
    directed sphere/pole/grazing and similarity rays, shared-line Crofton and
    CSG fixtures, Cobb/seam and topology fixtures, exhaustive interval
    arithmetic, fold proofs, and nonuniform affine behavior.  The executable
    retains its no-argument complete-corpus behavior, and `--core-only`
    remains available as a manual combined model-work mode.  No coverage was
    removed; the split only changes CTest scheduling.

    The first four-way split reduced the isolated optimized qualification
    wall time from approximately 238 seconds to 135.91 seconds, a roughly
    43 percent reduction.  Splitting the model work further into directed,
    Crofton, and seam entries produced six tests with an aggregate wall time
    of 138.02 seconds under `ctest --parallel 6`; the exhaustive interval
    enclosure audit remained the 137.98-second critical path.  Further
    interval subdivision is intentionally deferred: it would optimize test
    plumbing rather than advance the correctness-first production design.

    The no-argument optimized executable again ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`, including the complete interval,
    fold, grazing, Crofton, affine, and seam matrices.  The five sanitizer
    shards affected by model-work dispatch (`directed`, `crofton`, `seam`,
    `fold`, and `affine`) pass concurrently in 308.91 seconds with
    `halt_on_error=1` and no ASan/UBSan diagnostic.  The exhaustive interval
    sanitizer gate was already independently clean and its code path is
    unchanged by this dispatch-only split.

    This is the chosen validation parallelism boundary.  Continue using
    independent CTest processes and parallel builds.  Do not add threads
    inside the solver merely to shorten tests until OpenNURBS shared state,
    fixture ownership, BRL-CAD resources, and deterministic telemetry have an
    independent thread-safety qualification.  Correct root/event semantics
    and the intended production pipeline now take priority over further test
    runtime work.

62. The detailed plan now defines the intended production raytracer as one
    atomic proof/evidence pipeline rather than a series of local hit-cleanup
    heuristics.  A fixed-capacity per-ray completion ledger must account for
    every candidate span and terminal box as conservatively excluded,
    completely resolved regular, completely resolved boundary, resolved
    contact, or unresolved.  Unresolved is never a miss; it selects the
    whole-ray fallback before segment publication.

    The seven explicit stages are object/prep dispatch, conservative broad
    phase, complete local root isolation, trim/geometric classification,
    topology-first physical event resolution, ordered solid-state assembly,
    and atomic publication.  Newton supplies representatives but no proof
    authority.  Events reference immutable root records, identify physical
    identity through topology plus certified intervals, and carry ENTER,
    LEAVE, CONTACT, or unresolved state.  Minimum material size is decided
    only by outward comparison against `rti_tol.dist / |D|`.

    A selected prepared solid ray must prove complete coverage, a completely
    resolved event stream, valid {0,1} material state from negative infinity,
    finite endpoint provenance, and output capacity.  Any failure reruns the
    complete legacy ray during rollout; partial prepared and legacy hits are
    never spliced.  The legacy SurfaceTree is a continuity fallback and a
    comparison source, not a correctness oracle.  The implementation plan now
    has a separate certified-event/atomic-assembly phase before tree-density
    reduction and cache redesign.

63. The first completion-ledger/physical-event pipeline is implemented and
    has production authority for exactly the previously selected clean
    ordinary and cross-span fold cases.

    Every stored terminal surface box now has an explicit unresolved,
    resolved-regular, or resolved-boundary disposition.  For a
    Krawczyk-certified regular box, the outward per-coefficient ray-plane
    intervals construct the full Bernstein Jacobian determinant and require
    one strict sign over the box.  Face reversal converts that sign to a
    certified ENTER/LEAVE direction.  This reuses the exact-audited
    derivative/product/determinant arithmetic rather than trusting the
    nominal evaluated normal; disagreement is an observable unresolved
    event.

    A separate 64-entry fixed event array preserves the source box and local
    or fold root, representative t/UV, outward t interval, face/span,
    certificate type, determinant sign, trim/adjacency provenance, and event
    direction.  Clean regular boxes and the existing strict two-parent fold
    theorem populate this array without editing the source roots.  Clean
    outside-trim roots account for their mathematical box but produce no
    physical event.  Near-trim roots remain unresolved.

    The event finalizer sorts by outward t bounds, requires an alternating
    {0,1} material state from negative infinity, and classifies each
    ENTER/LEAVE gap against an outward `rti_tol.dist / |D|` interval.  A
    resolved gap is material, a strict subminimum gap is contact evidence,
    and a straddling gap is unresolved.  Direct publication is still limited
    to resolved material events or a completely certified empty ray;
    subminimum contacts await a dedicated direct-publication gate.

    `brep_build_prepared_partition` now requires one complete event ledger and
    emits its clean certified events directly into the fixed hit workspace.
    The legacy near-miss, near-hit, angle-grazing, duplicate, and assumed-sign
    cleanup passes no longer have authority over a selected prepared ray.
    Any incomplete ledger, near trim, contact ambiguity, provenance mismatch,
    state error, or capacity limit selects the complete legacy ray before
    segment output.  This narrows authority; it does not add a new root or
    seam repair.

    Permanent provenance ratchets cover six oblique sphere rays, all 30
    similarity rays, all 36 ordinary affine rays (72 certified roots), every
    selected affine grazing hit/miss, and all six hard fold pairs in both
    directions and through condition 1,000.  The sphere interior aggregate is
    `orientation=12/12`, `complete=6`, and `segments=6`; the signed sphere and
    bowed Cobb matrices require every selected prepared ray to have a complete
    event ledger (59/59 and 102/102 respectively).  The fold ratchet requires
    two resolved-boundary source boxes and two provenance-preserving events
    for every promoted pair.

    The optimized six-process CTest gate passes 6/6 in 143.38 seconds.  The
    directed, affine, seam, and shared-line Crofton/CSG tests preserve all
    prior partitions; all paired implicit/BREP fixtures retain zero differing
    lines.  The five affected ASan/UBSan shards (directed, Crofton, seam,
    fold, and affine) pass concurrently with halt-on-error in 300.17 seconds
    and no sanitizer diagnostic.  Dense SurfaceTrees, seam authorization,
    plate mode, and every fallback population are unchanged.

64. Production edge/seam eligibility no longer trusts the bounded
    correspondence sampler.  A prep-time global sufficient theorem now proves
    that the 3D edge and both lifted trims are injective and consistently
    oriented along one shared projection axis.  The old four-sample
    projection/tangent result is retained separately as diagnostic telemetry.

    Every positive-weight rational edge Bezier span is checked with exact
    binary64 expansions.  Its projected rational control polygon must be
    nondecreasing, contain a strict increase, and join the next span at an
    exactly identical projected endpoint and parameter knot.  A monotone
    rational control polygon makes the complete projected curve monotone, so
    this is a global statement rather than a collection of point samples.

    Boundary-isoparametric trims have a second exact path.  Expansions prove
    every trim control lies on the declared constant UV boundary, prove the
    varying trim coordinate monotone, and prove all corresponding rational
    surface-boundary control polygons monotone with the edge orientation.
    Nonnegative control differences with at least one strict difference allow
    zero endpoint derivatives; this is what certifies the converted sphere's
    same-face meridian seam through both poles without weakening an interval
    sign test.

    Other regular trims use outward interval arithmetic.  Each dyadic trim
    cell bounds its rational UV derivative, a padded UV hull, restricted
    rational surface partial derivatives, and the composed lifted derivative
    along the same projection.  Only a strict oriented lower bound certifies a
    cell.  Depth 24, a solid-wide 4,096-cell budget, arithmetic failure, or an
    unresolved/reversed derivative leaves the whole edge unsupported.  Cell
    count, maximum depth, exhaustion, the old screen, and the new certificate
    are separately visible in edge trace records and Cobb CSV output.

    The ordinary convex/concave/same-surface sector fixtures, nonlinear trim
    reparameterizations, all similarities, and the bowed seam continuation
    matrix retain their prior classifications.  The controlled target uses at
    most five exact correspondence cells at depth zero.  The ambiguity fixture
    is now substantially stronger: one degree-15 trim remains on the same UV
    segment and has forward values and derivatives at all four old sample
    locations, but reverses between t=0.4 and t=0.6.  The old screen accepts
    it; the global proof reaches its explicit depth-24 fallback, publishes no
    edge span/sector/closure, and leaves the legacy ray unchanged in both
    directions.  The complete optimized six-process gate passes 6/6 in
    144.49 seconds.  The five affected ASan/UBSan shards pass concurrently
    with halt-on-error in 282.39 seconds and no diagnostic; the independently
    gated exhaustive interval arithmetic remains unchanged.  The seven
    serial/parallel cache ownership cases plus rt_primitive_brep and the
    focused NIST miss, sphere-solid, and box-plate regressions pass 11/11,
    covering normal and deserialized derived-record reconstruction.  The same
    11-test matrix passes under ASan/UBSan in 12.88 seconds without a
    diagnostic.  Rebuilt ThreadSanitizer cache qualification passes all seven
    serial, parallel, identical, different, and hierarchy cases in 15.14
    seconds with no race or lock diagnostic.

    This completes correspondence identity/orientation, not geometric gap
    authorization.  The adaptive Hausdorff gap interval remains shadow-only,
    and production crack permission still uses sampled discrepancy.  The next
    seam task is decision-directed upper/lower refinement, exact-looking gap
    handling, conservative inferred/declaration policy, and an explicit
    inconclusive result at the tolerance boundary before replacing sampled
    authorization or emitting a seam event from the new physical ledger.

65. Production edge/seam gap authorization no longer trusts the fixed
    discrepancy sample.  `discrepancy_sample_authorized` retains the former
    33-point decision as trace/CSV telemetry, while
    `discrepancy_authorized` is initialized false and can be set only by the
    conservative prep-time gap proof.  Expanded edge boxes, sector
    classification, closure, and continuation therefore cannot acquire
    authority from the sample alone.

    The proof now visits every supported two-trim record whose global
    correspondence theorem passed, including seams whose fixed sample looks
    exact and seams whose sample lies beyond the model tolerance.  Each edge
    Bezier span is paired with complete, direction-consistent intervals on
    both incident trims.  Existing positive-weight rational control-hull and
    chord-deviation bounds enclose the maximum 3D edge-to-lift distance over
    every cell.  Accepted cell bounds combine by maxima over the complete
    edge and both incident faces.

    Refinement is directed by the effective edge envelope E.  A cell with a
    strict upper bound below E is complete for authorization.  A strict lower
    bound above E proves rejection; after that result, remaining cells are
    bounded without further subdivision.  A cell still straddling or touching
    E is subdivided until it decides, reaches depth 24, or has interval width
    at most max(roundoff, 0.01 E).  A valid parent bound whose refinement
    cannot proceed remains ambiguous rather than becoming permission.
    Unsupported initial arithmetic or topology is unavailable.  The existing
    solid-wide 4,096-cell budget remains fixed; exhaustion is unavailable and
    never publishes a partial proof.

    `RT_BREP_SEAM_GAP_INSIDE`, `OUTSIDE`, `AMBIGUOUS`, and `UNAVAILABLE` are
    reported independently from the old sample bit.  Both incident trims must
    be strictly inside before the record is authorized.  Either incident trim
    can prove outside; any unresolved boundary without an outside proof is
    ambiguous.  Equality is deliberately not inside.  In particular, the
    prior unset-tolerance policy may still record an envelope inferred from
    the sample, but a g=E proof straddles that envelope and does not
    self-authorize an arbitrary crack.

    The controlled g=2T metadata matrix now proves all four outcomes.  A
    1.01g declaration and a 2g declaration are strictly inside and authorize.
    Explicit zero and 0.5g declarations retain the model T floor, obtain a
    strict outside proof, and do not authorize.  An unset declaration infers
    E=g but is explicitly ambiguous and does not authorize.  In every case
    the conservative interval contains the independently sampled diagnostic.
    The sample-invisible degree-15 correspondence reversal stays unavailable,
    even though the old sample says it would authorize.

    The bowed Cobb target retains production crack repair for all declared
    1.01g cases in its 416-ray matrix.  Identity, nonlinear opposite Mobius
    trim reparameterization, translation, cyclic and oblique rotation, 0.01x
    similarity, and 10,000x similarity all prove the same target seam inside;
    the maximum controlled decision cost is 1,130 cells at depth 11.  The
    three-seam budget fixture certifies two targets, marks the third exhausted,
    and visits 1,220 target cells within the unchanged 4,096-cell solid cap.
    The complete optimized seam shard passes with zero below-envelope leaks,
    14 production repairs, no reversal inconsistency, and no manufactured
    correspondence or capacity result.

    The complete optimized six-process correctness gate passes 6/6 in 160.94
    seconds.  The five affected ASan/UBSan shards pass concurrently with
    halt-on-error in 313.89 seconds and no diagnostic.  The seven cache tests,
    rt_primitive_brep, and the focused NIST miss, sphere-solid, and box-plate
    regressions pass 11/11 normally and 11/11 under ASan/UBSan.  Rebuilt
    ThreadSanitizer cache qualification passes all seven serial, parallel,
    identical, different, and hierarchy cases in 19.99 seconds with no race
    or lock diagnostic.  This covers both normal prep and cached
    derived-record reconstruction under the new production authorization.

66. Certified manifold-edge crack continuation is now represented and
    published as an immutable two-event physical stream.  The former
    production repair still exists as the dense SurfaceTree fallback, but the
    prepared selector no longer has to manufacture a second `brep_hit` after
    cleanup for the controlled seam cases.  New certificate classes distinguish
    `SEAM_EXISTING` from `SEAM_CONTINUATION`; a separate source class identifies
    the outside-span continuation.  Each event records the edge index, source
    root, representative source box, number of boxes owned by that endpoint,
    face/span, UV, ray-parameter interval, trim/hit class, adjacency, and
    direction.  Regular and fold records explicitly carry one source box and
    no edge identity, so equal ordinal values in unrelated classification
    domains cannot silently alias the new theorem.

    The production gate is deliberately narrower than general edge event
    resolution.  It first requires complete supported surface-span traversal,
    fixed workspace success, complete local-root storage, and no previously
    published event.  A fixed scratch trace evaluates all prepared manifold
    edges.  Every nontrimmed, non-tangent CLEAN_HIT or NEAR_HIT local root is
    tried independently.  Exactly one root must identify exactly one closure
    edge through the existing sector classifier.  That edge must have global
    correspondence, a strict `RT_BREP_SEAM_GAP_INSIDE` bound, no proof or
    correspondence exhaustion, an inside material sector, and current-ray
    distance inside its authorized envelope.  Sampled discrepancy has no
    authority at this stage.

    The opposite endpoint is solved only on the incident prepared Bezier-span
    extension.  It must have the opposite direction, lie on the required side
    of the edge observation, and pass the bounded continuation certificate.
    Exactly one continuation candidate and one certified candidate are
    required.  Every isolated certificate box must contain that root, none may
    overlap the existing endpoint, the root must lie inside its outward t
    interval, and its oriented normal must be non-tangent.  Face, span, and
    adjacent-face provenance are copied from this proof rather than inferred
    later from a fabricated hit.

    Whole-ray ownership is checked before any box disposition changes.  Boxes
    containing the selected existing root become `RESOLVED_BOUNDARY`; their
    union supplies its outward t interval.  Any other local root must be
    tangent, incident to the same certified edge, and within model tolerance
    of the edge ray parameter.  Every remaining box must contain at least one
    such witness and becomes `RESOLVED_CONTACT`.  The special edge-only case is
    accepted only when there is no other local root and every retained box
    contains the existing endpoint.  Thus absence of a tangent surface root is
    not treated as missing ownership: the independently evaluated topological
    edge is the witness, while all surface work still belongs to the endpoint.
    Any extra non-tangent/off-corridor root, multiply classified box, unowned
    box/root, overflow, or ambiguous continuation leaves all source evidence
    intact and invokes the complete legacy ray.

    Only after that proof succeeds are the two event records appended.  The
    existing event retains its clean/near classification.  The continuation is
    explicitly a trimmed `CRACK_HIT` whose `closeToEdge` state is reconstructed
    consistently.  The normal event finalizer sorts the outward intervals,
    starts outside at negative infinity, requires one ENTER followed by one
    LEAVE, and applies the same outward `tol->dist / |D|` minimum-segment
    classifier used by folds.  Publication requires one resolved material
    segment, no subminimum or ambiguous contact, a final outside state, finite
    strictly ordered representative distances, successful hit reconstruction,
    and a complete two-event ledger.  Otherwise the prepared selector returns
    a structured whole-ray fallback before allocating or emitting a segment.

    The 416-ray bowed Cobb matrix now certifies sixteen paired streams and
    promotes 118 total prepared rays instead of 102.  Fourteen edge-only pairs
    reproduce all fourteen prior production crack repairs.  Two additional
    pairs own four tangent witness boxes/four tangent roots and replace the
    former legacy endpoint error; both directions agree with the implicit
    sphere to at most 2.71e-8.  Six otherwise plausible candidates contain an
    extra non-tangent or off-corridor root and remain fallback.  The other 298
    uncertified rays also retain fallback.  There are zero below-envelope
    leaks, regressions, ambiguous promotions, reversal inconsistencies,
    subminimum contacts, or state failures.  Per-ray tests independently
    reconstruct source/witness ownership from the immutable records and check
    edge identity, certificate/source classes, box dispositions, endpoint
    intervals, ENTER/LEAVE order, and analytic endpoint error.

    The optimized six-process correctness gate passes 6/6 in 153.44 seconds.
    The five affected ASan/UBSan shards pass concurrently in 282.55 seconds
    with halt-on-error and no diagnostic.  The seven cache tests,
    `rt_primitive_brep`, and focused NIST miss, sphere-solid, and box-plate
    regressions pass 11/11 normally and 11/11 under ASan/UBSan.  Rebuilt
    ThreadSanitizer cache qualification passes all seven cases in 15.49
    seconds without a race or lock diagnostic.  No SurfaceTree density or
    cache format changed.  After adding the final per-ray assertion that an
    ownership failure cannot publish an event or select production, the
    focused optimized seam shard passes in 24.89 seconds and its rebuilt
    ASan/UBSan counterpart passes in 68.94 seconds without a diagnostic.

    This checkpoint did not yet solve general edge clustering or cyclic
    vertex fans.  Direct contact-only publication, overlapping
    representations, a crack embedded in a ray with unrelated ordinary
    segments, and many-to-many edge clusters remain explicit fallback
    targets.  Finding 67 adds the first cyclic planar vertex-fan theorem.  The
    continuation certificate localizes all possible roots and gates a
    converged corrector; a future stricter interval-existence theorem can
    strengthen that endpoint without changing the event or fallback contract.

67. Exact crossings of supported closed manifold planar vertex fans now
    publish immutable physical events.  Prep constructs one record per BREP
    vertex without changing SurfaceTree density or cache serialization.  Every
    incident edge must be unique, two-trim, globally correspondence-certified,
    within its conservative edge/lift gap envelope, and free of proof or
    workspace exhaustion.  Valence must fit the fixed local-root workspace.
    Every incident face must occur on exactly two incident edges, and the
    directed face arcs must form one connected cycle.  Boundary,
    non-manifold, disconnected, repeated, inconsistently oriented, or
    capacity-limited fans are marked unsupported rather than partially used.

    Each incident edge contributes its outgoing tangent at the vertex.  Trim
    direction, trim reversal, face reversal, and the two edge endpoints decide
    the directed arc through each face.  The arc stores its full clockwise
    sweep, not merely its endpoint vectors.  This distinction is necessary at
    reentrant corners: a 270-degree material face sector and its 90-degree
    complement have the same endpoint rays, and an endpoint-only `atan2`
    would silently convexify the vertex.  Outgoing tangents must lie in their
    incident face planes and every corner must be nondegenerate.

    The initial theorem is intentionally planar.  Incident faces must pass an
    OpenNURBS plane test with a coordinate-scaled binary64 roundoff envelope,
    `4096 * DBL_EPSILON * coordinate_scale`, rather than model tolerance.  The
    first implementation used an exact-zero plane tolerance and the
    similarity matrix exposed false unsupported results after arbitrary
    rotation.  The roundoff envelope repairs representation noise without
    authorizing genuinely curved faces or turning modeling tolerance into a
    topology classifier.

    At shot time, the ray line must contain the topological vertex within a
    similarly strict coordinate-roundoff envelope.  Only after that exact
    geometric witness exists may solver observations be grouped within one
    tenth of the model distance tolerance.  A ray merely near a vertex is not
    promoted by this theorem.  The prepared cyclic link is projected onto the
    unit sphere about the ray direction.  Each stored face sweep is divided
    into pieces no larger than pi/4, rotated with Rodrigues' formula, and
    accumulated with long-double projected `atan2` terms.  The oriented
    winding satisfies

        W(D) / (2 pi) = I(+D) - I(-D).

    A winding of +1 is ENTER and -1 is LEAVE.  This handles convex and
    reentrant solid angles without depending on which incident surface Newton
    happens to return.  A direction transverse to every incident face and a
    winding close to exactly plus or minus `2 pi` are required.  Exact
    face-tangent rays, zero winding, and numerically ambiguous winding retain
    fallback; they are not assigned material by parity.

    Whole-ray ownership is again proved before mutation.  At least one
    non-tangent local surface root and terminal box must establish numerical
    hit provenance for each physical vertex.  Every observed nearby root must
    belong to an incident face, be unique on that face, agree with the winding
    direction, and be non-CRACK.  Every such root owns all matching terminal
    boxes, and every incident terminal box covering the exact vertex parameter
    must be owned.  A box without a matching root is fallback.  The cyclic
    topology may witness an incident face whose redundant surface solve is
    absent only when that face also produced no terminal box; all evidence
    that does exist must still be accounted for.  Multiple disjoint vertex
    clusters and remaining ordinary roots are accepted only when their box and
    root ownership sets are disjoint and the ordinary theorem is complete.

    After the complete proof, owned boxes become `RESOLVED_BOUNDARY` and one
    `VERTEX_FAN` event is appended at the exact topological vertex parameter.
    Its source kind and certificate are `VERTEX_FAN`, its hit class is
    `CRACK_HIT`, its vertex identity is valid, and its edge identity is
    invalid.  Existing regular,
    fold, and seam events explicitly carry an invalid vertex identity.  The
    event records one or more source boxes and a canonical source root; stream
    telemetry separately counts attempts, candidates, winding checks,
    ambiguity, certificates, events, owned boxes, and owned roots.  No disposition or
    event changes until all vertex clusters, remaining ordinary events, the
    global {0,1} state machine, outward minimum-segment proof, and fixed hit
    reconstruction succeed.  Runtime traversal and classification use only
    fixed-capacity shot workspaces; the variable-sized cyclic records are
    immutable prep data.

    The convex gate converts an ARB8 and shoots four exact mixed
    vertex-plus-regular rays in both directions.  All eight prepared vertices
    are supported; each ray owns three roots and three boxes, emits one vertex
    and one regular event, and reconstructs the legacy one-segment answer.
    An exact face-tangent line in both directions and rays displaced only 0.25
    model tolerance from the vertex remain explicit fallback.  The concave gate
    converts an exact L-shaped implicit EXTRUDE to BREP.  A single line crosses
    its reentrant top vertex and a convex bottom vertex, producing two
    disjoint vertex events, six roots, at least six boxes, and the same two
    endpoints as the implicit primitive to 1.78e-15 in both directions.

    Translation, arbitrary rotation plus translation, 0.01x uniform scale,
    and 10,000x uniform scale plus large translation repeat the L-shaped test
    in both directions with scaled model tolerances.  All twelve vertex
    records remain supported and two certified events produce one complete
    segment in every case.  Direct redundant surface-root counts vary under
    transformation, which is why the theorem relies on the certified cyclic
    topology while still requiring complete ownership of every actual root
    and terminal box.  Tests independently reconstruct incident-face, root,
    box, direction, source-count, reversal, and final-partition ownership from
    the immutable trace rather than trusting production counters.

    The optimized six-shard BREP correctness corpus passes 6/6, with the
    interval shard remaining the 138.83-second critical path.  The focused
    cache/conversion/NIST regression matrix passes 11/11.  ASan/UBSan exposed
    a latent EXTRUDE alignment defect in the new implicit oracle: four loops
    cast every sketch segment to `carc_seg` before reading its common magic,
    although line segments may be only four-byte aligned.  They now read the
    common 32-bit magic and cast only confirmed circular arcs.  The rebuilt
    seam shard passes normally in 29.31 seconds and under ASan/UBSan with
    halt-on-error in 97.59 seconds while run beside the cache gates; together
    with the four already clean
    affected shards, the sanitizer ray gate is 5/5.  The focused cache,
    primitive-conversion, and NIST regression matrix passes 11/11 normally and
    11/11 under ASan/UBSan in 19.66 seconds.  Rebuilt ThreadSanitizer cache
    qualification passes all seven serial and parallel cases in 26.13 seconds
    without a race or lock diagnostic.
    Curved differential vertex links, tolerance-near intended vertex closure,
    and non-manifold fans remain explicit future theorems rather than
    relaxations of this planar gate.  Finding 68 adds the separate exact
    interior manifold-edge theorem; non-exact tolerance-near edge/vertex
    neighborhoods remain outside both the planar vertex and exact edge gates.

68. Exact interior crossings of supported two-trim manifold edges now publish
    immutable physical events without relying on which incident surface root
    Newton retained.  The existing prep-time edge record remains the authority:
    its rational edge/lift correspondence must be globally injective and
    consistently oriented, its conservative gap calculation must finish
    without budget exhaustion, and its proof class must be strictly
    `SEAM_GAP_INSIDE`.  Sampled discrepancy remains telemetry only.

    The shot theorem first proves that the mathematical ray line contains the
    evaluated topological edge point within a coordinate-scaled binary64
    envelope,

        max(ON_ZERO_TOLERANCE,
            4096 * DBL_EPSILON * coordinate_scale).

    This exact witness is independent of model tolerance.  Points inside the
    edge envelope of either endpoint are excluded so the cyclic vertex theorem
    or whole-ray fallback retains authority.  Only after the exact witness is
    established does the declared/certified edge envelope associate redundant
    roots on the incident trimmed surfaces.

    The oriented edge cross-section now records two classifications separate
    from its older closest-offset diagnostic.  Projecting the ray across the
    edge produces `line_before_state` from the negative cross-ray direction
    and `line_after_state` from the positive direction.  The complete oriented
    material sector, including a reflex sector at a reentrant edge, decides
    OUTSIDE-to-INSIDE ENTER, INSIDE-to-OUTSIDE LEAVE, or unchanged CONTACT.
    A direction on a sector boundary or tangent to either incident face does
    not acquire a guessed direction.

    Exact witness tolerance and root association tolerance are intentionally
    distinct.  The wider authorized edge/lift envelope admits corrected roots
    whose representative t values differ slightly among trimmed
    representations or solver runs.  Every source terminal box must still
    contain the exact topological parameter within coordinate roundoff.  Thus
    a nearby independent root whose box does not contain the witness is left
    for the ordinary theorem rather than merged by geometric proximity.  Both
    unresolved boundary boxes and already Krawczyk-certified regular boxes may
    become edge sources, but a regular box is topologically reclassified only
    after the complete edge proof succeeds.

    Every associated root must belong to an incident face, match a lifted trim
    frame inside the authorized spatial envelope, be finite and non-tangent,
    and agree with the sector transition when one exists.  Multiple roots and
    boxes from adjacent surface spans are one physical event only when their
    boxes independently enclose the same exact parameter and their directions
    agree.  This includes a periodic same-surface edge whose two trims belong
    to one face.  Duplicate ownership, an unowned incident box at the witness,
    a conflicting root, unsupported topology, or any capacity/failure state
    aborts the theorem before mutation.

    All disjoint exact edge clusters are collected in one fixed-capacity
    transaction.  A transition appends one `MANIFOLD_EDGE` event at the exact
    topological parameter, with `MANIFOLD_EDGE` source kind, valid edge
    identity, invalid vertex identity, `CRACK_HIT` class, direction, canonical
    root, representative box, complete source-box count, and the union of
    source intervals.  A CONTACT appends no transition but owns its roots and
    changes its boxes to `RESOLVED_CONTACT`.  Transition boxes become
    `RESOLVED_BOUNDARY`.  Remaining ordinary roots, including strictly
    identical same-face duplicate observations, must independently own only
    regular Krawczyk boxes.  Clean outside groups are consumed without an
    event.  No trace disposition or event changes until every root and box is
    owned, the {0,1} state stream and outward minimum-size proof complete, and
    fixed-workspace hit reconstruction succeeds.

    The edge theorem runs even when all terminal boxes initially have
    Krawczyk certificates.  This matters when an exact near-trim root was
    numerically certified as a surface root but ordinary trim finalization
    cannot establish the physical topology.  Vertex-source matching was made
    consistent with this rule as well: an exact planar vertex cluster may own
    an already regular box, and one remaining ordinary root may own several
    disjoint matching regular boxes.  Neither change broadens the vertex line
    witness or winding theorem.

    The permanent exact L-shaped implicit EXTRUDE fixture supplies three edge
    line families, each shot in both directions.  The first line produces a
    convex outer ENTER and reentrant LEAVE.  The second produces two outer
    transitions plus one reentrant CONTACT, which owns its evidence but leaves
    one continuous material segment.  The third mixes one regular bottom-face
    event with one reentrant edge event.  All production endpoints match the
    analytic L profile to at most 3.55e-15.  Transverse cases also match the
    implicit EXTRUDE.  On the exact reentrant-contact line, the implicit
    primitive reports three hits and drops the final endpoint; this is a
    separate measure-zero EXTRUDE defect, so the analytic profile is the
    authoritative oracle for that one contact case.

    A separate line through the reentrant edge lies exactly on an incident
    face-sector boundary.  It observes two exact ambiguous edge encounters,
    publishes no edge event, and cannot select a prepared partition.  The
    current surface isolator reaches its conservative box-capacity fallback
    before the edge theorem; the ratchet also permits the theorem's explicit
    unresolved rejection if earlier isolation later improves.  In either
    path, no other even-looking event stream may hide the ambiguity.

    Translation, arbitrary rotation plus translation, 0.01x scale, and
    10,000x scale plus large translation repeat all three families in both
    directions with scaled model tolerances.  The classifier, event stream,
    contact result, complete source ownership, and analytic partition are
    invariant.  A converted rational sphere adds a periodic same-surface seam
    case.  An oblique line crosses the seam exactly, with four independently
    converged seam roots/four enclosing boxes, then exits at an ordinary point;
    both directions publish one edge event and one regular event and match the
    analytic sphere endpoints to at most 7.23e-9.

    The complete optimized six-shard corpus passes 6/6 in 167.30 seconds, with
    the exhaustive interval shard the 166.93-second critical path.  The five
    affected ASan/UBSan shards pass concurrently with halt-on-error in 628.08
    seconds and no diagnostic.  The focused cache, primitive-conversion, and
    NIST regression matrix passes 11/11 normally in 4.72 seconds and 11/11
    under ASan/UBSan in 14.55 seconds.  Rebuilt ThreadSanitizer cache
    qualification passes all seven serial and parallel cases in 18.28 seconds
    without a race or lock diagnostic.  No SurfaceTree density, cache format,
    or serialized prep representation changed.  After the final independent
    assertion that the unchanged-state edge-sector classification itself is
    similarity-invariant even when a redundant contact solve is absent, the
    rebuilt seam shard passes in 24.93 seconds optimized and 178.92 seconds
    under ASan/UBSan without a diagnostic.  After adding the final
    sector-boundary fallback ratchet and fail-closed exact-edge accounting,
    the rebuilt seam shard passes in 45.84 seconds optimized and 92.77 seconds
    under ASan/UBSan; the complete optimized main corpus also passes in 49.88
    seconds.

    This checkpoint resolves exact interior manifold-edge transitions,
    unchanged-state contacts, multiple clusters, mixed ordinary streams, and
    periodic same-surface representation duplication.  It does not yet
    authorize non-exact tolerance-near lines, arbitrary endpoint-moving
    gaps/overlaps, sector-boundary tangency, edge/vertex neighborhood overlap,
    or non-manifold topology.  Those remain separate proof and corpus targets;
    the narrow paired seam-continuation theorem remains unchanged.

69. A separately certified tolerance-near incident-face contact-lobe subtype
    now resolves the six non-tangent ownership failures deliberately excluded
    by Finding 66.  The endpoint-preserving bowed-Cobb matrix identifies them
    precisely on the inward-displaced face at g/T = h/T = 0.5, 0.9, and 1.0
    in both ray directions.  Each trace contains the ordinary selected outer
    endpoint and independently isolated continuation plus two clean,
    non-tangent roots on the other incident face.  Those two roots sort as
    ENTER/LEAVE inside the analytic sphere chord.  They are a tolerance-near
    incident-surface lobe within intended material, not tangent witnesses and
    not two extra solid transitions.

    The implementation leaves the original paired seam theorem first and
    unchanged.  Only when its tangent-witness ownership rejects extra non-
    tangent roots does `brep_trace_seam_contact_roots` try the new fixed-work
    subtype.  Qualification requires:

      * a ray/edge distance strictly above the coordinate-scaled exact-line
        envelope, preserving the exact manifold-edge theorem's authority;

      * an already supported global edge/lift correspondence and completed
        strict `SEAM_GAP_INSIDE` proof, with the measured discrepancy and both
        trim lifts inside the independently authorized model envelope;

      * an initially perpendicular edge cross-section,
        `abs(ray_edge_dot) <= 1e-10`;

      * exactly two other CLEAN_HIT or NEAR_HIT roots, on the other incident
        face and one span, retained by trim classification, finite and non-
        tangent, ordered ENTER then LEAVE, and strictly between the two outer
        physical representatives;

      * exact geometric mapping of the certified edge parameter to the
        contact trim, rather than equal normalized parameter speed;

      * complete single-role ownership of all roots and boxes.  Each contact
        box must be an unresolved zero-determinant box on that face/span,
        contain at least one contact root, contain the mapped trim UV, and
        contain the projected edge t in its outward interval; and

      * a nonempty union of contact-box t intervals strictly inside the outer
        endpoints and wholly inside the oriented material sector.

    The final sector condition is a whole-segment test, not two point
    classifications.  Both t-hull endpoints are projected into the certified
    edge-normal plane; a projected segment reaching the roundoff neighborhood
    of the edge is rejected.  Otherwise its direction makes one monotone
    angular sweep shorter than pi.  The code computes the signed minor turn
    with `atan2`, unwraps that sweep, and requires its complete angular range
    to stay strictly between the oriented sector boundaries.  This matters
    for reflex sectors, where two inside endpoints alone do not prove the
    chord avoids the complementary cone.

    Corrected scalar root representatives no longer have to bracket the edge
    projection.  The initial version did so with a binary64 roundoff margin;
    the 0.01x reverse-similarity case placed one representative about 1.6e-12
    past the projection while its certified terminal box still enclosed it.
    Representative ordering is not a proof.  The final rule uses the outward
    terminal boxes for edge-t containment and retains strict representative
    ordering only against the outer material endpoints.  This restores ray-
    reversal and scale invariance without introducing a model-tolerance t
    merge.

    Contact roots emit no transition.  Only after the full transaction and an
    event-capacity check do their boxes become `RESOLVED_CONTACT`; outer source
    boxes become `RESOLVED_BOUNDARY`.  The two real endpoints receive distinct
    `SEAM_CONTACT_EXISTING` and `SEAM_CONTACT_CONTINUATION` certificates.  The
    trace records one contact pair, the actual box count, and exactly two
    roots.  Publication eligibility requires the matched certificate pair,
    contact counters 1/>0/2, four direction checks, no old tangent-witness or
    edge-only evidence, and matching near-trim box accounting.  Ordinary seam
    pairs conversely require zero contact counters and their original witness
    accounting.  Moving the event-capacity check ahead of disposition changes
    also closes a latent non-atomic overflow path in the older seam subtype.

    The immutable test validator independently reconstructs both contact
    roots, their ordering, trim state, normal state, source/contact box roles,
    root coverage, UV/t containment, contact-box hull, and the two outer
    analytic sphere endpoints.  Its Möbius-reparameterized Cobb oracle applies
    the exact fixture mapping rather than calling production mapping logic.
    The 416-ray matrix changes from 16 to 22 certified seam pairs, 32 to 44
    seam events, 118 to 124 selected prepared partitions, and six ownership/
    witness failures to zero.  The new aggregate is six contact pairs, twelve
    boxes, and twelve roots.  Implicit-oracle differences fall from 268 to 264;
    all 208 tolerance-band differences and 56 outside-band differences remain
    explicitly classified, with zero below-envelope leaks in this endpoint-
    preserving family.

    The existing classifier similarity gate now adds the exact contact state
    to identity, nonlinear trim reparameterization, translation, cyclic and
    arbitrary-axis rotations plus translation, 0.01x scale, and 10,000x scale
    with large translation.  Both directions pass in all seven forms: fourteen
    contact certificates preserve the analytic normalized sphere chord.  The
    adaptive surface isolator legitimately represents a contact pair with one
    or two terminal boxes depending on transform; physical ownership and the
    final interval remain invariant.

    A first endpoint-moving family now moves the complete rational boundary
    row while preserving weights, measures the resulting target/adjacent-edge
    and endpoint-vertex lift discrepancies, and sets each affected declared
    tolerance from that independent measurement.  It covers g/T = 0.25, 0.9,
    and 1.1,
    inward/outward signs, h/T = 2.0, 0.9, 0.25, 0, and -0.25, and reversal: 60
    rays total.  All target edges retain supported correspondence but report
    `SEAM_GAP_UNAVAILABLE` before adaptive gap traversal (zero cells and no
    exhaustion), so the new contact subtype publishes none.  The baseline has
    16 legacy one-hit cases, eight unrelated ordinary prepared selections, 48
    implicit/variant differences all inside the explicit uncertainty band,
    and two below-envelope no-partition leaks.  `rt_brep_ray_endpoint` makes
    this a parallel monotone ratchet: those counts may improve but may not
    increase, and any difference outside the uncertainty band fails.  This is
    preserved evidence of the endpoint/vertex correspondence gap, not a claim
    that endpoint-moving crack handling is correct.

    Optimized verification after the final segment and representation gates:

      cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j6
      ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
        -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure

    PASS: 7/7 in 132.22 seconds.  The new endpoint shard passes in 3.19
    seconds, the expanded seam shard in 27.33 seconds, the complete main
    process in 46.63 seconds, the Crofton process in 56.94 seconds, and the
    exhaustive interval shard remains the 132.18-second critical path.
    A final focused optimized rerun after endpoint-vertex metadata and
    coordinate-scale hardening passes seam plus endpoint 2/2 in 24.15
    seconds (endpoint 1.53, seam 24.11).

      env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
        UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
        ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
          -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure

    PASS: the final post-hardening rerun passes 2/2 in 114.16 seconds
    (endpoint 7.69, seam 114.12) with no
    sanitizer diagnostic.

      env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
        UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
        ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 4 \
          -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_(crofton|fold|affine)$)' \
          --output-on-failure

    PASS: the remaining four affected/non-interval shards in 318.88 seconds
    (fold 1.12, affine 18.46, main 300.43, Crofton 318.84), again with no
    ASan/UBSan diagnostic.  The unchanged exhaustive arithmetic shard remains
    covered by the earlier sanitizer checkpoint and the fresh optimized gate.

      ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
        -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
        --output-on-failure

    PASS: 11/11 in 4.26 seconds.  The same matrix passes 11/11 under
    ASan/UBSan with halt-on-error in 12.69 seconds.

      cmake --build .build-tsan --target librt rt_cache -j6
      env TSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:second_deadlock_stack=1 \
        ctest --test-dir .build-tsan --parallel 4 \
          -R '^rt_cache_.*$' --output-on-failure

    PASS: the final rebuild and rerun passes 7/7 in 14.62 seconds with no
    ThreadSanitizer diagnostic.  No
    SurfaceTree density, cache format, dynamic shot allocation, or serialized
    prep representation changed.

    This checkpoint resolves one exact two-root incident-face contact shape,
    not arbitrary overlaps.  More than two roots, multiple contact faces or
    spans, oblique edge motion, endpoint-moving discrepancy, trim-only or
    edge-only errors, sector-boundary tangency, vertex neighborhoods, and
    non-manifold topology remain fail-closed targets.

70. Endpoint-moving discrepancy now has a topological boundary certificate,
    and seam dispatch no longer depends on which solver isolated the root.

    Finding 69's endpoint family stopped before its first discrepancy-bound
    cell even though the shared-projection correspondence theorem succeeded.
    The failure was a stronger assumption than BREP topology provides:
    `brep_bound_edge_trim_discrepancy` used a geometric nearest-point solve for
    the edge-domain endpoints and then required the resulting trim parameters
    to equal the trim domain endpoints to binary64 parameter roundoff.  Once a
    complete boundary row and its surface-lifted endpoints move within declared
    tolerance, the trim endpoint remains topologically paired to the edge
    vertex but need not be the nearest lifted point to the edge endpoint.
    Consequently every target returned `SEAM_GAP_UNAVAILABLE` with zero cells;
    this was a parameter-boundary assumption, not a failure of the global
    injectivity/orientation certificate or the rational Hausdorff bounds.

    Prep now certifies each of the four edge/trim endpoint incidences before
    bounding discrepancy.  For edge endpoint e, trim endpoint
    `m_bRev3d ? 1-e : e` must name exactly `edge.m_vi[e]`.  The 3-D edge endpoint
    and the surface lift of that exact trim-domain endpoint must both be within
    the same `ON_BrepVertex` point by the maximum of the BRL-CAD model distance
    tolerance and that vertex's valid declared tolerance, plus a coordinate-
    scaled 512-epsilon/`ON_ZERO_TOLERANCE` roundoff envelope.  The test follows
    the OpenNURBS tolerance contract directly and reconstructs these distances
    without calling production code.  A large edge tolerance or the other
    endpoint's tolerance cannot satisfy this per-vertex proof.

    The two certified topological trim parameters now seed the complete gap
    partition.  The first cell starts at the oriented trim-domain endpoint;
    each following Bezier edge span inherits the preceding trim endpoint
    exactly; and the last cell ends at the other topological endpoint.  Only
    interior span boundaries use the geometric nearest-point map, constrained
    to the remaining directed trim interval.  Adaptive midpoint solves remain
    constrained to their parent interval.  This covers both complete loci,
    avoids a boundary hole, and preserves the earlier nonlinear Möbius trim-
    reparameterization theorem.  The same positive-weight control hulls and
    strict gap comparison remain in force.  A new
    `discrepancy_endpoints_certified` record/trace field is required explicitly
    by closure and seam consumers; unavailable, ambiguous, outside, and
    exhausted proofs remain fallback.

    The first transformed endpoint check then exposed a second independent
    representation dependency.  Identity and pure translation produced one
    ordinary seam pair, but arbitrary rotation or uniform scaling isolated the
    one surviving surface root with Krawczyk.  Physical dispatch equated "all
    boxes Krawczyk-qualified" with "regular solid boundary stream" and never
    attempted seam completion, even though the single clean ENTER or LEAVE was
    unbalanced.  Krawczyk proves local surface-root uniqueness, not completeness
    of a closed solid's physical transitions.  Dispatch now counts retained
    clean/near non-tangent ENTER and LEAVE roots before mutation.  A direction
    imbalance lets the unchanged seam theorem run regardless of the root-box
    solver; balanced all-Krawczyk streams still go directly to the regular
    theorem.  The existing endpoint/continuation, edge-sector, root/box
    ownership, event-capacity, and global material-state gates are unchanged.

    The primary endpoint-moving matrix still covers 60 rays: g/T = 0.25, 0.9,
    and 1.1; inward/outward displacement; h/T = 2.0, 0.9, 0.25, 0, and -0.25;
    and reversal.  All 60 independently satisfy their topological endpoint
    contract and now report a complete strict INSIDE discrepancy proof, with a
    maximum 1,598 cells and no exhaustion.  The original narrow seam theorem
    certifies the inward g/T=0.9, h/T=0.25 case in both directions using the
    standard existing/continuation certificates, not Finding 69's two-root
    contact-lobe certificates.  Both immutable event enclosures contain the
    implicit-sphere endpoints and their representatives agree within 2.5e-4 T.
    The two former below-envelope no-partition leaks disappear.  The new
    monotone baseline is 16 legacy one-hit cases, at least two independently
    oracle-validated certified pairs, ten current prepared selections, at most
    46 implicit/variant differences all within the declared uncertainty band,
    zero outside-band differences, and zero below-envelope leaks.

    A separate endpoint-specific similarity gate repeats that repaired state
    forward and backward under translation, arbitrary-axis rotation plus
    translation, 0.01x scale, and 10,000x scale with large translation.  All
    eight cases reconstruct the endpoint contract, obtain strict INSIDE gap
    proofs (1,278 cells in the current fixtures), publish the standard seam
    pair, contain the scaled implicit endpoints in their certified t boxes,
    and preserve representative accuracy.  Two in-memory g/T=2 controls lower
    one endpoint tolerance at a time and are rejected by the independent
    endpoint oracle.  They are deliberately not sent through BREP prep because
    the metadata is invalid; malformed-model prep robustness is separate from
    valid-model ray classification.

    The endpoint shard passes with this new 60-ray ratchet, eight transformed
    directions, and two metadata controls.  The full seam shard also passes;
    its endpoint-preserving bowed matrix improves from 264 to 262 implicit
    differences and from 208 to 206 uncertainty-band differences, while the
    56 outside-band cases, 22 certified pairs, and zero below-envelope leaks
    remain unchanged.  This checkpoint changes prep-time edge certificates and
    allocation-free shot dispatch only.  It does not change SurfaceTree
    density, cache serialization, fixed shot workspace sizes, or add shot-time
    allocation.

    This proves complete endpoint association for an edge discrepancy
    corridor; it is not a vertex-neighborhood transition theorem.  Rays whose
    relevant edge parameter lies in a vertex neighborhood, curved vertex fans,
    arbitrary endpoint overlap graphs, oblique contact intervals with varying
    edge frames, sector-boundary tangency, and non-manifold topology remain
    fail-closed targets.

71. The first bounded oblique contact-lobe subtype is now a qualified
    production path.  It preserves Finding 69's exact two-root incident-face
    topology and outer-event publication, but replaces the perpendicular
    branch's frozen edge UV, ray t, and material frame with a complete local
    interval certificate.  The perpendicular branch and its original tests
    remain unchanged.

    Prep retains the terminal cells from each strict edge/trim discrepancy
    proof.  Each `brep_edge_trim_cell` records the exact edge interval,
    constrained trim interval, prepared Bezier edge span, and trim index.
    Cells are installed only for a completed strict `SEAM_GAP_INSIDE` edge
    whose two correspondences passed the exact isoparametric theorem.  Generic
    injective/oriented correspondence, unavailable/ambiguous/outside gap
    proofs, and exhausted budgets retain no frame-interval authority.  The
    target bowed-Cobb edge currently exposes 566 two-sided terminal cells.
    Cached prep rebuilds this process-local vector without changing the cache
    format.

    Shot-time proof is fixed-work and transactional.  For every unresolved
    zero-determinant contact box, it intersects the paired prepared partitions
    and locally remaps both trim intervals inside their parents.  Adjacent
    rootless unresolved zero-determinant boxes are attempted only when they
    share the already selected contact face and surface span.  A complete trim
    UV interval on that incident face must be contained in each box's UV
    rectangle.  The complete box t interval must be inside every material
    sector frame on the interval.  Every box, including a rootless corridor
    candidate, needs one certificate; linked box t intervals must cover the
    contact hull, and the edge tangent dot ray must have one nonzero consistent
    sign.  Rootless boxes on the source outer face or another span are not
    candidates.  Vertex neighborhoods, exact/interval parallelism,
    unsupported spans, mapping failures, and every work/depth/capacity limit
    return whole-ray fallback before any box or event mutation.  The proof
    uses a 32-cell stack, depth 20, at most 8,192 visited cells, fixed coverage
    storage, and insertion sorting; it performs no shot-time allocation.

    Edge points, tangents, both surface derivative frames, outward normals,
    and interior conormals are outward interval bounds over the complete cell.
    The rational derivative quotient-rule numerator is now formed as
    Bernstein product coefficients before taking a hull.  This preserves the
    shared `X'W-XW'` cancellation that independent numerator/weight hulls lost
    and avoids amplifying that dependency error when a small restriction is
    rescaled.  Surface derivative evaluation uses a small containing
    parameter neighborhood to keep outward arithmetic stable; widening cannot
    exclude the actual UV interval.

    Sector classification uses homogeneous determinant signs and the same
    edge-normal projection as the fixed-frame theorem.  For each fixed edge
    parameter, a boundary determinant is affine in ray t, so strict interval
    signs at both box endpoints prove the complete segment.  Convex sectors
    require both boundary predicates throughout; reflex sectors require one
    predicate throughout, preventing the segment from crossing the
    complementary convex cone.  A turn interval containing zero is accepted
    only as a smooth pi sector when the projected conormal dot is strictly
    negative and both boundary predicates pass.  Every determinant containing
    zero otherwise fails closed.

    The first exploratory projection-linked implementation was removed.  It
    could associate a box with an edge point that merely had the same ray
    projection while lying physically far along the seam.  A second blind
    low-parameter-first search exhausted its budget before reaching the
    prepared closest-edge witness.  The final proof links by incident-face UV
    containment and only prioritizes the witness-containing child as a search
    order; all interval obligations remain unchanged.

    Tracing records `frame_interval_supported/cells` on the edge plus one
    oblique pair, certified frame-cell count, and box-link count.  Production
    eligibility requires one oblique pair, at least one frame cell, and links
    equal to contact boxes.  Perpendicular contact and ordinary seam pairs
    require all oblique counters to be zero.  The immutable validator accepts
    oblique ownership only with that evidence and still independently checks
    roots, boxes, outer events, and the implicit sphere chord.  The global
    root-coverage gate normally rejects any rootless terminal box.  Its sole
    exception is a box already resolved by a completed oblique transaction
    whose one-pair ledger links every contact box.  A rootless box cannot gain
    production authority merely from its location, determinant, or proximity.

    At this checkpoint the permanent trend used seam-tangent components 1e-4,
    1e-3, 0.01, 0.05,
    0.25, 0.5, and 1 in both ray directions: all fourteen require production
    certification and analytic chord agreement.  The 1e-3 and 0.05 cases
    require certification of one or two contact boxes despite only one box
    owning a nominal surface root.  Components 1e-6, 10, and 1e6 require six
    safe fallbacks.  Component 0.1 is observational in both directions and
    remains fallback because its extra unresolved box is on the source outer
    face, where the contact theorem cannot prove surface-root completeness.  A
    separate 14-case gate repeats component 1e-3 forward/reverse under
    identity, nonlinear trim reparameterization, translation, cyclic and
    arbitrary-axis rotation, 0.01x scale, and 10,000x scale.  Every case
    selects production and contains the scaled analytic sphere endpoints.

    Optimized verification:

      cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
      ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
        -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure

    PASS: 7/7 in 153.86 seconds (seam 80.38, interval 153.81, complete
    process 45.64, Crofton 56.00).  The focused optimized
    cache/conversion/NURBS matrix passes 11/11 in 8.93 seconds.

      env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
        UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
        ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
          -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure

    PASS: 2/2 in 392.94 seconds (endpoint 16.01, seam 392.81) with no
    sanitizer diagnostic.  The ASan/UBSan cache/conversion/NURBS matrix passes
    11/11 in 15.41 seconds.

    This checkpoint does not change SurfaceTree density, acceleration-cache
    serialization, the two-root contact topology, or fixed shot workspace
    capacities.  Arbitrary/multiface/multispan contacts, non-isoparametric
    frame intervals, trim-only and edge-only errors, exact tangency,
    sector-boundary contact, vertex neighborhoods, and non-manifold topology
    remain fallback targets.

72. A connected source-root union now supplies the missing surface-root count
    theorem for the component-0.1 oblique Cobb cases.

    The forward case had three terminal boxes.  Contact face/span 0/0 owned
    one unresolved contact box.  Source face/span 1/1 had a depth-20 regular
    Krawczyk box containing the analytic outer sphere root at approximately
    UV (0.0070216, 0.499223), plus a rootless depth-24 zero-determinant box
    immediately below it.  Their V intervals met at 0.4992098714, their U
    intervals overlapped, and their outward t intervals overlapped.  Reverse
    had the same two source boxes plus two separately certified contact boxes.
    The contact material-sector theorem could prove that contact boxes hide no
    transition, but said nothing about a second root on the outer source
    surface.  The former whole-ray fallback was therefore correct.

    The new `brep_trace_seam_source_union` proof begins only inside a qualified
    finite nonparallel oblique contact transaction.  The source face/span must
    differ from the contact face/span.  Every source-root-owning box must
    already be `RESOLVED_REGULAR` with one nonzero consistent determinant
    sign.  Additional candidates must be unresolved, zero-determinant,
    rootless boxes on exactly that source face/span.  Fixed boolean arrays grow
    only the component connected to a root box by closed UV-rectangle
    intersection and outward t-interval overlap, with a 256-epsilon roundoff
    allowance.  A disconnected box or a box containing any local/fold root is
    never considered owned.

    The proof takes the component's complete rectangular UV hull, maps it into
    the prepared Bezier span, widens its normalized boundaries outward by one
    binary64 step, reconstructs the two ray-plane Bernstein systems from the
    positive-weight control net, and restricts them with the existing audited
    outward arithmetic.  Strict Krawczyk inclusion over that entire hull proves
    existence and uniqueness of one surface root.  Because the regular source
    box already contains a root, every connected rootless box is redundant
    isolator coverage rather than another solid transition.  All arrays and
    coefficients are fixed stack storage; there is no shot-time allocation.

    Publication remains atomic.  A successful seam event keeps a root-owning
    box as its representative, uses all component boxes for its outward t
    interval and source-box count, and records
    `physical_event_seam_source_union_certified/root_boxes/boxes`.  Eligibility
    requires either all three fields zero or exactly one certificate with
    `0 < root_boxes < boxes` and `boxes == event.source_box_count`.  The global
    root-coverage gate waives a rootless resolved-boundary box only after the
    complete seam eligibility check and that ledger.  The immutable validator
    independently checks representative ownership, determinant roles, the
    same UV/t connectivity graph, every root and box, and the analytic sphere
    chord.

    Component 0.1 now requires production in both directions with a `1/1/2`
    source-union ledger, raising the trend to sixteen required certifications,
    six fail-closed threshold controls, and no observational cases.  The
    similarity/reparameterization/reversal gate retains the fourteen
    component-1e-3 contact-corridor cases and adds fourteen component-0.1
    source-union cases.  All 28 select the same analytic sphere partition.
    Isolation topology needs the union proof in eight of those cases; the
    other six component-0.1 cases have no rootless source box and correctly
    carry an all-zero ledger.  Thus physical classification is similarity
    invariant without requiring solver box topology itself to be invariant.
    Each identity direction also copies its valid trace into three negative
    controls.  The immutable validator rejects a UV-disconnected rootless box,
    `root_boxes == boxes` ledger corruption, and selection of the rootless box
    as the event representative.

    Optimized verification:

      ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
        -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure

    PASS: 7/7 in 145.51 seconds (seam 110.84, interval 145.46, complete
    process 44.68, Crofton 57.36).  The focused optimized
    cache/conversion/NURBS matrix passes 11/11 in 6.28 seconds.

      env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
        UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
        ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
          -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure

    PASS: 2/2 in 527.51 seconds (endpoint 8.63, seam 527.47) with no
    sanitizer diagnostic.  The ASan/UBSan cache/conversion/NURBS matrix passes
    11/11 in 13.71 seconds.

    Root-owning boxes without a regular Krawczyk/determinant certificate,
    disconnected candidates, other faces/spans/roots, a failed outward
    restriction or non-strict Krawczyk image, perpendicular contact, and every
    previously unsupported contact topology still fail closed.  SurfaceTree
    density, cache serialization, and fixed workspace capacities are
    unchanged.

73. A solver-level source-union corpus now tests the root-count theorem
    independently of Cobb geometry and adaptive box topology.

    `brep_source_union_component` is shared by production and the private test
    hook.  It validates finite ordered UV/t boxes on exactly one face/span,
    seeds only boxes already known to own the selected root, grows through the
    production closed-UV plus outward-t connectivity predicate, and computes
    the complete rectangular hull.  Production still derives root and
    candidate roles from immutable root/box provenance.  The synthetic hook
    supplies roles directly, but then uses the same one-step outward hull
    widening, bounded Bernstein restriction, and strict production Krawczyk
    inclusion.  A disconnected eligible candidate now stops the production
    helper before restriction; the former path reached the global unowned-box
    rejection instead, so both behavior and authority remain fail-closed.

    Five exact systems are permanent:

      * cubic `F=(u-1/2)+(u-1/2)^3/4`, `G=v-1/2` over a connected two-box
        hull certifies one root;
      * UV-disconnected and t-disconnected copies each retain only the root
        box and do not attempt Krawczyk;
      * `F=(u-3/8)(u-5/8)`, `G=v-1/2` has one selected root and a second root
        in the connected candidate box, so complete-hull Krawczyk fails;
      * singular `F=(u-1/2)^2`, `G=v-1/2` uses rootless boxes on both sides of
        the root box and fails certification over its symmetric hull.

    A sixth invalid-input control marks a box as root-owning while supplying
    a nominal root outside it; provenance validation rejects it before graph
    or Krawczyk work.  The fast `rt_brep_ray_source_union` shard passes in
    0.02 seconds optimized and 0.15 seconds under ASan/UBSan.  The final exact
    optimized eight-shard matrix passes in 154.89 seconds, with the real seam
    and interval paths at 119.61 and 154.84 seconds.  The corpus is also called
    by the interval and unsharded complete tests.  The exact-code ASan/UBSan
    seam companion passes in 745.40 seconds with no diagnostic; it overlapped
    an optimized rebuild and is not a performance baseline.  All graph storage
    remains fixed-capacity stack memory.

74. Oblique material-sector frames now support globally certified curved
    non-isoparametric trims through complete retained rational intervals.

    Prep no longer discards frame authority merely because a trim is not
    W/E/S/N isoparametric.  The existing global correspondence theorem must
    still certify the edge and both trims as injective and consistently
    oriented.  The strict discrepancy transaction now also retains each
    authorized trim's immutable positive-weight rational Bezier spans.
    Installed `brep_edge_trim_cell` records identify the complete side-local
    span range.  Cells and spans are appended only after both endpoint
    contracts, both correspondences, and both strict gap bounds complete, so
    no partial span data can acquire production authority.  Cached prep
    reconstructs the process-local spans from the BREP; cache serialization is
    unchanged.

    At shot time, `brep_interval_trim_cell_geometry` intersects a mapped trim
    cell with every retained span and restricts homogeneous numerator and
    weight controls with the existing outward interval arithmetic.  Positive
    weight division encloses the complete UV locus.  Coefficient-wise
    `X'W-XW'` rational derivatives enclose both UV differential components.
    The union must cover the complete trim parameter cell, and its UV hull must
    fit exactly one prepared surface span.  Missing spans, incomplete
    coverage, a surface-span crossing that local subdivision cannot isolate,
    nonfinite arithmetic, unsupported order, or any work limit fails the
    whole ray closed.

    The generic loop tangent is the interval chain rule
    `L=Su*(du/ds)+Sv*(dv/ds)`.  The local span parameter differs from the
    original trim parameter only by a positive scale, so every homogeneous
    orientation and material-sector sign is preserved.  All prior outward
    normal, interior conormal, edge-tangent, complete ray-t sector, monotone
    sweep, box ownership, source-union, immutable-event, and atomic
    publication obligations remain unchanged.  Exact isoparametric trims keep
    their endpoint/fixed-coordinate fast path.  Generic contact-face box
    ownership uses the complete rational UV hull rather than endpoints.

    A new valid Cobb fixture bows the target surface seam by exactly model
    tolerance and replaces the opposite incident trim with an
    endpoint-preserving quadratic Bezier bowed toward its face interior.  Its
    measured maximum 3D trim-lift change is `0.05*T`; the curve is required to
    be genuinely non-isoparametric, endpoint preserving, and BREP-valid.
    The maximum separation between the two lifted trims is `1.00125*T`, while
    their separate distances from the shared edge remain `T` and `0.05*T`;
    the declared edge tolerance is `1.01` times the two-lift separation.  This
    keeps model tolerance, edge metadata, and the geometric discrepancy facts
    explicit rather than using one number for all three roles.
    Seam-tangent components 0.001 and 0.1 in both directions require the
    analytic sphere chord, production selection, strict correspondence/gap
    evidence, a nonempty frame-cell proof, and the complete oblique ledger.
    Identity component 0.1 additionally requires the `1/1/2` connected
    source-union ledger.

    The same four rays pass after arbitrary-axis rotation plus translation,
    0.01x similarity, and 10,000x similarity with large translation: 16/16
    classifications select the same analytic partition.  As in Finding 72,
    transformed adaptive box topology may use either the ordinary source-root
    proof or a valid source-union proof; identity retains the exact union
    ratchet.  The existing hidden-reversal degree-15 trim remains a required
    correspondence/discrepancy fallback in the seam suite.  The focused
    `rt_brep_ray_nonisoparametric` shard isolates this matrix and runs in
    parallel with the larger ray tests.

    This adds prep memory proportional to retained trim Bezier spans only on
    strictly authorized seam edges.  It adds no shot-time allocation and does
    not change SurfaceTree density or fixed workspaces.  A trim perturbation on
    the contact-root face can change which roots the earlier closure stage
    admits; this checkpoint does not invent those roots or replace that stage
    with a tolerance tube.  Changed contact-root topology, unsupported
    rational data, arbitrary faces/spans/root counts, exact or sector-boundary
    tangency, vertex neighborhoods, and non-manifold topology remain
    fail-closed.

75. The production rational trim restriction now has an independent
    solver-level corpus, and complete span coverage is an interval-union proof
    rather than a length sum.

    A private `_rt_brep_trim_interval_test` hook accepts at most four fixed
    rational Bezier spans, constructs a test-local `brep_specific`, and calls
    `brep_interval_trim_cell_geometry` directly.  It does not copy or
    approximate the production interval algorithm.  Test construction may
    allocate, but the helper exercised by production remains fixed-storage and
    allocation free.  Invalid interface data is distinct from unavailable
    theorem data: malformed/nonfinite requests return false, while missing
    provenance, incomplete coverage, nonpositive weights, or an OpenNURBS
    construction refusal return a valid result with `available=0`.

    The former shot and prep coverage checks summed all positive
    span-intersection lengths.  That was not a proof of a complete locus:
    duplicate or overlapping spans could contribute the same parameter
    interval twice and hide a gap.  Both stages now share
    `brep_trim_spans_cover`, which grows a covered prefix from the cell minimum
    by repeatedly selecting the farthest reachable span endpoint.  It succeeds
    only when that interval union reaches the cell maximum.  The scan is
    bounded by the retained span count, assumes no span ordering, and
    allocates no storage.  Boundaries retained from the same knot vector must
    meet exactly; any representable parameter gap fails closed rather than
    becoming geometric authority through a numerical allowance.  UV and
    derivative hulls still include every positive-length intersection;
    coverage cannot excuse an invalid weight, order, or interval operation.

    Fourteen deterministic requests cover a positive rational quadratic on a
    monotone subinterval, two joined spans in both storage orders, reversed
    control direction, an exact span-boundary cell, missing and zero-count
    provenance, incomplete coverage, a deliberately overlap-masked gap, zero
    and negative weights, a rational turning derivative containing zero, and
    nonfinite controls and domains.  The rational quadratic is independently
    evaluated at 65 points.
    Every UV value and quotient-rule derivative lies inside the production
    result; derivative comparison includes the positive local
    reparameterization scale introduced by interval restriction.  Strict
    derivative signs are required where mathematically valid and zero must
    remain enclosed at the turning point.

    The focused optimized `rt_brep_ray_trim_interval` shard passes in 0.01
    seconds and reports fourteen cases, six available enclosures, six valid
    fail-closed results, and two invalid-input rejections.  The exhaustive
    `rt_brep_ray_interval` shard, which now includes the corpus, passes in
    143.15 seconds in the final ten-process matrix.  Full parallel and
    sanitizer matrices are recorded in the verification log below.

    This checkpoint qualifies complete rational trim UV and derivative
    enclosures only.  It does not change SurfaceTree density, root isolation,
    contact-face ownership, seam tolerances, or publication authority.  A
    contact-face trim perturbation can still alter which exact surface roots
    the earlier closure stage admits.  Extending that behavior requires an
    allocation-free local surface/trim/edge tube plus a separate root-ownership
    theorem; proximity samples and tolerance-manufactured roots remain
    forbidden.

76. A contact-face trim may now contribute one explicitly tube-qualified
    classifier miss to the narrow incident-face contact-lobe theorem.

    Contact-face perturbation isolated the earlier failure stage.  With a
    `0.05*T` trim lift, the contact face still reports two mathematical trim
    hits.  At `0.1*T`, the same three ray/surface roots, three terminal boxes,
    correspondence proof, closure candidate, continuation, and material
    ordering remain, but the exact edge-coincident root changes from
    `CLEAN_HIT` to `CLEAN_MISS`.  Hard model-tolerance closure also rejected
    the complete discrepancy `1.00498*T` even when the edge explicitly
    declared a larger accuracy envelope.

    Ordinary and legacy closure still use the hard model tolerance `T`.
    Declared edge metadata must not broaden that classifier: the bowed-seam
    matrix deliberately requires every complete discrepancy above `T` to
    report zero ordinary closure candidates, even when the edge declaration
    is larger.

    A separate provisional classifier exists only inside the prepared
    contact-event transaction.  After hard closure fails, it may compute
    `C=max(model_tolerance, declared_edge_tolerance)` only when the edge
    declaration is valid, explicit, and strictly larger than `T`.  A cheap
    immutable-ledger screen first requires exactly two transverse roots on the
    other incident face/span, ordered ENTER/LEAVE with exactly one trim hit and
    one trim miss.  Only then is the continuation solve attempted.  The
    provisional state remains private and its prepared candidate counters are
    deferred until the authoritative contact theorem proves the same one-miss
    pattern.  A zero-miss contact, arbitrary miss layout, or failed later proof
    discards it without changing legacy closure or publishing a transaction.

    This separation is a tested correction, not just documentation.  The
    first implementation put `C` directly in the general closure classifier.
    It caused 31 failures in the exhaustive seam shard by activating bowed
    discrepancies at `g/T=1.1`, `2`, and `10`; aggregate certified seam pairs,
    prepared selections, and seam events moved from `22/124/44` to
    `56/158/112`.  Restoring hard `T` closure and screening the private
    declared-tolerance path before continuation restores the exact
    `22/124/44` ratchets while retaining all sixteen intended contact-face
    certifications.

    The explicit path does not use the prep record's effective tolerance,
    because that value can contain vertex metadata and, for an unset edge
    tolerance, the measured discrepancy itself.  Inferred tolerance therefore
    remains useful for candidate observation but cannot authorize closure or a
    trim miss.  Invalid model tolerance fails closed, and an invalid/unset edge
    declaration contributes no expansion beyond model tolerance.

    The contact-root theorem still requires exactly two transverse roots on
    one other incident face and span, ordered ENTER then LEAVE strictly inside
    the outer source/continuation segment.  Both must be exact ray/surface
    solver results.  At least one must remain a clean/near trim hit; at most
    one may be a clean/near trim miss.  For that miss, the production code maps
    the certified shared-edge parameter to the contact trim and evaluates the
    shared edge point, corresponding surface-lifted trim point, and miss-root
    surface point.  The root point must lie within `C` of both model-space
    references.  No root is fabricated, reflected, merged by t distance, or
    moved to the edge.

    The new point witness only associates an already solved root with the
    authorized seam corridor.  It cannot publish an event independently.
    Complete source and contact box ownership, connected source-union where
    needed, complete rational trim-cell coverage, outward material-sector
    intervals over every contact box, monotone edge sweep, event order, and
    minimum material segment remain mandatory.  The miss count is published
    atomically with the two hidden contact roots only after that full
    transaction succeeds.  All older seam/contact tests explicitly require
    zero misses.

    The focused `rt_brep_ray_contact_trim` shard bows the valid
    endpoint-preserving quadratic trim on the contact face by `0.1*T`.  It
    requires the analytic sphere chord, production selection, the complete
    oblique ledger, and exactly one miss for tangent components `0.001` and
    `0.1`, both ray directions, and identity, rotated/translated, `0.01x`, and
    `10,000x` similarities.  Direct output reports 16/16 certifications, 16
    miss roots, two identity source unions, lift `0.1*T`, and gap
    `1.00498*T`.  Every positive ray now also requires zero ordinary closure
    candidates and one prepared closure/continuation candidate.  Six
    forward/reverse controls with a model-only declaration, an exact-gap
    declaration without strict proof margin, and an unset/inferred declaration
    require zero ordinary and prepared closure/continuation candidates and
    remain on fallback with no published seam transaction.

    At this checkpoint, a stronger interval-root tube had been explored and
    removed rather than being allowed to create transform-dependent authority.
    The existing terminal root box had a complete surface hull about `0.00335`
    from the shared edge against `C=0.0005075`, and the first strict-interior
    Krawczyk variants certified only four of sixteen transformations.  Finding
    77 supersedes that point-only limitation with a boundary-capable local
    contraction and complete rational image proof; the historical failure is
    retained because it explains why terminal boxes and ordinary Krawczyk are
    not suitable authority.

77. Declared contact-face repair now requires a unique local analytic root
    whose complete rational image is inside both model-space tubes.

    Inspection of the actual identity/component-0.001 coefficient system
    showed that the miss root is exactly at normalized support boundary
    `u=1`, while the neighboring hit is about `1.7e-4` away in normalized
    infinity norm.  Both roots occupy the same terminal surface box.  A proof
    requiring strict parameter-domain interior, or the complete terminal box
    to fit the seam tube, therefore rejects the intended geometry for reasons
    unrelated to root existence.

    The new fixed-work solver converts both homogeneous ray-plane Bernstein
    equations into complete finite Taylor expansions at the already solved
    miss.  Bernstein finite differences, derivative evaluation, fixed-point
    images, and derivative bounds use outward fixed-expansion arithmetic;
    factorial scaling successively divides by exactly representable small
    integers with outward intervals.  A binary64 midpoint Jacobian inverse is
    only a preconditioner.  Starting at the larger of four times the correction
    bound and `1024 eps` of root scale, the solver tries at most 48 doubling
    radii.  It accepts only strict self-map inclusion with a `512 eps r`
    margin and infinity-norm contraction below one.  Production caps the
    radius below one quarter of the neighboring contact-root separation.
    Singular, nonfinite, expansion-capacity, inclusion, contraction, or radius
    failures leave the complete ray on legacy fallback.

    This contraction proves exactly one root of the analytic Bezier extension,
    but crossing a span boundary is not automatically geometric authority.
    A second theorem forms each homogeneous coordinate difference
    `X_i-P_i W` relative to the nominal rational point and encloses all three
    difference polynomials plus `W` over the complete symmetric root box with
    the same Taylor arithmetic.  The weight lower bound must remain strictly
    positive.  After outward rational division and Euclidean combination, the
    resulting model-image displacement `B` must satisfy

        |P-E| + B <= C + coordinate roundoff
        |P-L| + B <= C + coordinate roundoff.

    Thus the whole unique-root image, including its analytically extended
    portion, lies inside both the certified shared-edge and lifted-trim tubes.
    The nominal point checks remain useful screening evidence but no longer
    supply the final authority.

    The production transaction records declared-contact pairs, root attempts,
    availability, uniqueness, boundary extension, radius, image displacement,
    both tube upper bounds, tolerance, roundoff, and tube failures.  A selected
    declared repair requires exactly one attempt, one available unique root,
    no tube failure, and the unchanged full box/source/material/event theorem.
    Ordinary model-tolerance and zero-miss paths require an empty local-proof
    ledger.  The proof performs no allocation during ray tracing.

    The focused C/C++ arithmetic corpus now has thirteen classified systems.
    The original layer has three affine boundary roots and three nearby
    quadratic root pairs at equation scales `2^-100`, `1`, and `2^100`, plus
    multi-root, singular, and uncertain interval systems.  The conditioning
    layer adds a degree-elevated order-9-by-9 affine system, a coupled
    degree-15-by-7 boundary root, and nearly singular affine systems with
    Jacobian determinants `2^-20` and `2^-40`.  Ten cases certify uniquely in
    one attempt and the three ambiguous/singular cases fail closed.
    Invalid-input and explicit tube pass/reject controls are additional gates.

    Three actual prepared rational bilinear surfaces independently exercise
    coefficient extraction and the complete model-image theorem: equal
    weights; a `2^20` control-weight ratio with ray reversal; and the same
    ratio after `10,000x` scale and a large translation.  All three certify a
    support-boundary-crossing root with positive weight and finite complete
    image.  Maximum image displacement is `2.27e-9`; root and model expansion
    high-water are both 2.  A `2^400` ratio is now retained as a required prep
    rejection: its parameter derivative is numerically singular under the
    current OpenNURBS normal threshold.  Finding 79 makes that rejection
    fail-closed instead of aborting the process.  It remains a prep robustness
    case, not a local-certificate failure and not a reason to relax the
    theorem.

    The real Cobb test independently replays the actual prepared coefficient
    intervals for all sixteen transformations and reversals.  All sixteen
    certify in one attempt, all sixteen root boxes cross the analytic support
    boundary, all exclude the neighboring root, and all have positive weight
    and complete image containment.  Maxima are radius `9.13e-11`, correction
    `2.28e-11`, contraction `2.54e-6`, model image `2.16e-5`, and
    fixed-expansion high-water 26.  The image maximum is from the `10,000x`
    similarity and scales as model-space length.

78. Real near-grazing sphere roots now ratchet the local certificate down to
    one tenth of model tolerance without granting general grazing authority.

    The existing signed sphere matrix already sweeps hit-side clearances from
    `2^-1` through `2^-50`, tolerance-targeted chords, exact tangency, mirrored
    misses, reversal, and similarity; the affine matrix separately covers
    anisotropic conditioning.  What was missing was a direct bridge from real
    close curved-surface roots into the fixed-expansion uniqueness and
    rational-image theorem introduced by Finding 77.

    The focused bridge chooses the generic unit radial `(2,3,6)/7` and unit
    tangent `(3,-2,0)/sqrt(13)`, away from the converted sphere's seams and
    span boundaries.  In both ray directions it constructs analytic chords of
    `100`, `10`, `2`, `1.1`, `1`, `0.9`, `0.5`, `0.1`, and `0.01` times model
    distance tolerance.  Each raw local root is matched to
    `2R +/- chord/2`, and its measured absolute normal dot is compared to
    `chord/(2R)`.  Both roots must be on one prepared face/span.  The test
    first obtains their normalized UV separation, then reruns each complete
    root/model-image certificate with a downward-rounded radius cap below one
    quarter of that separation.  Every accepted root box must remain strictly
    inside the analytic span with positive rational weight.

    All ten resolved directed pairs through one tolerance certify.  Six more
    sub-tolerance pairs at `0.9T`, `0.5T`, and `0.1T` certify.  At `0.01T` the
    two candidate pairs are unavailable, with no later restart.  Both exact
    tangent directions retain a raw contact observation but correctly refuse
    a unique-root certificate, and all eighteen mirrored miss-side rays have
    no local root or final segment.  Minimum normalized root separation is
    `5.92e-6`; maximum certificate-radius/separation is `0.00239`, contraction
    `0.0258`, model-image displacement `3.87e-7`, normal-dot error `3.47e-9`,
    and fixed-expansion high-water 10.  Every certificate takes one attempt.

    This result proves that the new local theorem remains effective as two
    real rational-surface roots converge and become ill-conditioned.  It does
    not prove candidate completeness over the parent region, absence of other
    roots, material pairing, or exact-double-root classification.  Those are
    independent obligations for the intended production grazing pipeline.
    The focused `rt_brep_ray_grazing_root` CTest shard makes this distinction a
    permanent, independently parallelizable ratchet.

79. Numerically unavailable SurfaceTree faces now fail complete BREP prep
    instead of aborting the process or permitting a partial acceleration tree.

    `initialBBox` previously called `bu_bomb` when `surface_EvNormal` could not
    produce the estimate point and normal.  The positive-weight rational
    bilinear diagnostic with weights `2^-200` and `2^200` reached this path:
    its geometry and homogeneous controls are finite, but the parameter
    derivative is below the OpenNURBS normal threshold at the midpoint.  A
    single difficult input could therefore terminate conversion, rendering,
    or a test process before librt could report prep failure.

    `initialBBox` now evaluates the midpoint of its actual local `u,v` box and
    returns no node when the normal is unavailable.  Surface subdivision
    treats every missing expected child as failure of the complete subtree,
    deletes every sibling built for that subdivision, and propagates failure
    to the root.  After parallel face construction joins, `brep_build_bvh`
    validates every SurfaceTree before releasing any root or CurveTree.  One
    invalid face deletes all temporary builders and makes `rt_brep_prep`
    return failure.  No face can disappear from an otherwise successful solid
    BVH.

    An invalid SurfaceTree is now an ordinary observable builder state:
    depth, closest-estimate, leaf, and surface-point queries are null-safe, and
    the libged and librt plotting helpers skip it.  Existing callers that use
    `Valid()` continue unchanged.  Successful prep retains the prior ownership
    order: every CurveTree is transferred only after all faces validate, the
    temporary builders are destroyed, and the top-level BVH owns all released
    roots.

    The weighted focused corpus now has four surfaces.  Equal weights and the
    two `2^20` weight-range/reversal/similarity cases still prep and certify;
    the `2^400` case must return prep failure without invoking the local-root
    hook.  This is deliberately whole-solid fail-closed behavior.  A future
    algorithm may support more extreme parameterizations, but it may not
    recover by raytracing an incomplete face set.


IMPLEMENTATION CHECKLIST
------------------------

[x] Phase 1 ownership
    [x] Give brep_specific explicit CurveTree ownership.
    [x] Add safe SurfaceTree root/CurveTree release operations or equivalent
        builder-result ownership transfer.
    [x] Destroy temporary SurfaceTrees after transfer.
    [x] Remove unused m_face_user.p storage.
    [x] Own deserialized CurveTrees and verify teardown order.
    [x] Reject a complete prep before ownership transfer when any SurfaceTree
        is invalid; never publish a partial face hierarchy.
    [x] Exercise ownership through existing normal/cached prep regression
        tests, ASan/UBSan, and the unsuppressed ThreadSanitizer cache matrix.
        LeakSanitizer remains blocked by the host ptrace wrapper.

[ ] Phase 1 solver hardening
    [x] Add structured solver outcomes without changing final seam policy.
    [x] Accept an initially converged positional root.
    [x] Replace random/ineffective singular jitter with deterministic handling.
    [x] Check Ev1Der, finite values, root t, and normal construction.
    [x] Reuse singularity-aware normal evaluation where appropriate.
    [ ] Add pole, boundary, reverse-ray, and repeated-run tests.
        [x] Exact north/south poles, reverse directions, and repeatability.
        [x] Periodic seam, surface-boundary inward, and inside starts.
        [x] Small/large scale and large translations for directed sphere rays.
        [ ] Clarify/test the public unit-direction contract before adding
            non-unit raw ft_shot cases.

[x] Legacy native ray-code audit
    [x] Trace the original Utah alternatives and 1991 native BSPLINE solver.
    [x] Remove the unreachable native BSPLINE ray wrapper and stale compile
        switch; retain live nmg_nurb_intersect for NMG/IGES callers.
    [x] Carry only independently justified two-plane and conservative
        control-hull ideas into the proposed modern design.
    [x] Record rejection reasons and provenance in this continuation log.

[ ] Paired correctness harness
    [x] Register directed, Crofton, seam, interval, fold, affine, local-root,
        and grazing-certificate correctness partitions as independent
        deterministic CTest processes; retain the no-argument complete-corpus
        executable.
    [ ] Compare implicit/CSG and converted BREP ordered partitions.
        [x] Seed in-memory C++ corpus with paired sphere raw segments and
            normal rt_shootray partitions.
        [x] Exercise normal rt_shootray partitions for six analytic fixtures.
        [x] Exercise five binary CSG combinations with BREP-substituted leaves.
        [x] Exercise pristine sewn Cobb against its implicit sphere oracle.
        [ ] Exercise nested/larger database hierarchies and reverse
            BREP-to-CSG reconstruction as later qualification tiers.
    [x] Reuse identical deterministic Crofton lines and bounding sphere for
        the analytic primitive fixtures; CSG reuse remains.
    [x] Report per-line crossing and chord differences for analytic fixtures.
    [x] Implement initial signed logarithmic sphere grazing report and a
        non-regression envelope.
    [x] Add fixed-capacity raw root, solver outcome, trim class, and cleanup-
        stage tracing for the bowed Cobb matrix.
    [x] Add aggregate implicit/BREP/analytic sphere Crofton ground truth.

[ ] Tolerance/seam work
    [ ] Separate numerical, UV, model-space seam, t-cluster, and minimum
        segment tolerances.
    [ ] Prepare topology/adjacency and seam discrepancy records.
        [x] Prepare two-trim edge/incident-face records and exact-parameter,
            positive-weight rational Bezier edge spans during normal and
            cached prep.
        [x] Measure face/edge lift discrepancy and resolve unset, zero,
            under-declared, and over-declared tolerance policies.
            [x] Record initial sampled discrepancy, model/declaration source,
                inferred envelope, and explicit authorization state.
            [x] Gate correct, unset, zero, half, and double declarations on a
                controlled g=2T Cobb seam.
            [x] Replace fixed sampling with conservative knot-aware adaptive
                discrepancy bounds before production use.
                [x] Add a shadow Hausdorff interval for supported, visibly
                    discrepant regular two-trim edges within the model
                    envelope, with explicit depth/cell capacity reporting.
                [x] Gate nonlinear trim reparameterization, similarity,
                    dense bowed-gap containment, and solid-wide budget
                    exhaustion.
                [x] Bound exact-looking loci, preserve unsupported/exhausted
                    fallback, make g=T explicitly ambiguous, and replace
                    sampled production authorization with strict proof.
    [ ] Preserve near-trim candidate evidence through local event resolution.
        [x] Add fixed-capacity same-face preliminary local-root clusters and
            entering/leaving/contact observability in shadow mode.
        [x] Classify prepared roots with the allocation-free face-wide trim
            hierarchy and gate clustered trim/class/direction/adjacency
            equivalence against depth-eight legacy candidates.
        [x] Materialize prepared candidates and canonical physical clusters in
            fixed brep_hit workspaces, observe every cleanup stage, and store
            final solid intervals without production-path allocation.
        [x] Compare changed final partitions to the implicit oracle and hard-
            fail regressions or ambiguous changes rather than requiring bug-
            for-bug legacy equivalence.
    [x] Observe fixed-work 3D ray/shared-edge distance and declared edge-
        tolerance qualification independently of the UV trim tree.
    [x] Classify shadow-mode edge material sectors and validate smooth and
        sharp-convex inside/contact/outside behavior under ray reversal.
    [x] Gate sharp convex, re-entrant concave, and periodic same-surface edge
        sectors for inside/contact/outside states under ray reversal.
    [x] Classify uniquely compatible unmatched solid events and activate the
        fully certified subset in production,
        including ordered missing directions and non-activation on target
        contact/exterior states.
    [x] Gate edge-sector and closure classifications under pure translation,
        exact and arbitrary-axis rotation, and 0.01x/10,000x uniform scaling
        with scaled model tolerances, including bounded local-root clusters
        and normalized positions.
    [x] Recover the missing controlled bowed-seam endpoint with a bounded,
        allocation-free adjacent-support continuation and gate
        it against the implicit oracle and similarities.
    [x] Publish the controlled existing/continuation pair through immutable
        physical events only after complete edge, box, root, interval, and
        solid-state qualification; retain whole-ray fallback otherwise.
    [x] Add the narrow tolerance-near two-root incident-face contact subtype
        with distinct certificates, complete UV/t box ownership, whole-sector
        segment proof, analytic endpoints, reversal, trim-reparameterization,
        and 0.01x/10,000x similarity gates.
    [x] Extend that exact subtype to nonparallel edge motion only through
        prep-retained isoparametric correspondence cells, outward rational
        edge/surface frame intervals, complete incident-box UV/t ownership,
        affine whole-segment sector signs, monotone edge sweep, reversal,
        analytic chord, threshold, and full similarity gates.  All unsupported
        frame, vertex-neighborhood, determinant, and capacity cases fail closed.
    [x] Extend the same frame theorem to globally certified curved
        non-isoparametric trims by retaining complete positive-weight rational
        trim spans, enclosing full UV loci and derivatives, applying the
        surface chain rule, and preserving every former sector and ownership
        obligation.  Gate real curved Cobb trims under reversal and
        0.01x/10,000x similarities in a focused parallel shard.
        [x] Exercise the exact production trim restriction through a private
            rational quadratic/multispan solver corpus, and replace summed
            coverage lengths with a no-allocation interval-union proof that
            rejects overlap-masked gaps.
    [x] Extend the narrow contact-face theorem to one already solved trim miss
        only when explicit edge metadata authorizes both the complete seam gap
        and the root-to-edge/root-to-lift tube.  Keep inferred tolerances out
        of authority, keep ordinary closure hard at model tolerance, confine
        the expanded envelope to a private prepared-event candidate, require
        the unchanged complete box/material transaction, and gate all
        similarities/reversals in a focused shard.
        [x] Replace nominal-point authority with an allocation-free
            fixed-expansion contraction proving one analytic boundary root,
            cap its radius below one quarter of the neighboring-root
            separation, and bound the complete positive-weight rational image
            inside both model-space tubes.  Gate scaled affine and quadratic
            coefficient systems, ambiguity/singularity rejection, explicit
            tube rejection, and all sixteen real Cobb coefficient replays.
    [x] Remove the equal-normalized-speed assumption for regular two-trim edge
        correspondence and gate opposite nonlinear trim reparameterizations.
    [x] Add vertex-fan and ambiguous-correspondence gates.
        [x] Gate exact and near convex three-edge fan rays before invoking
            the vertex transition resolver.
        [x] Screen a bowed forward/backward/forward trim and retain its
            one-event crack without unsafe repair in both directions.
        [x] Replace the bounded regularity screen with a conservative global
            injectivity/orientation proof, retaining explicit unsupported and
            depth/workspace fallback.
        [x] Implement cyclic planar vertex fans.
            [x] Prepare one closed directed manifold link with full convex or
                reflex face sweeps and explicit unsupported fallback.
            [x] Classify exact transverse crossings by spherical winding and
                publish multiple disjoint vertex clusters atomically.
            [x] Gate convex ARB8 and concave implicit-EXTRUDE oracles in both
                directions, including mixed vertex/regular event streams.
            [x] Preserve exact face-tangent and near-but-not-on-vertex
                fallback; do not use model tolerance to invent a vertex hit.
            [x] Gate translation, rotation, and 0.01x/10,000x similarity
                invariance with independently reconstructed source ownership.
            [ ] Extend the theorem to certified curved differential links and
                separately define tolerance-near intended vertex closure.
    [ ] Add sewn and perturbed Cobb fixtures and threshold matrices.
        [x] Add reusable legacy-unsewn and solid-sewn Cobb constructors.
        [x] Gate topology, face/seam/vertex rays, scale, and 8,000 shared
            implicit-oracle lines for the pristine sewn form.
        [x] Add a calibrated, endpoint-preserving bowed support-seam family
            with signed inward/outward displacement and g/T sweep.
        [x] Add the first endpoint-moving boundary-row family with measured
            target/adjacent-edge and endpoint-vertex discrepancy, reversal,
            uncertainty-band, and monotone leak ratchets.
        [x] Certify its oriented topological endpoints, seed a complete strict
            gap proof, remove the two below-envelope leaks, and gate the
            repaired pair under reversal and qualified similarities.
        [x] Add seam-crossing tangent-limit rays, reversal checks, CSV output,
            and a ratchet around the measured current crack envelope.
        [x] Add the first valid-model isolated trim-only and edge-only
            representations, exact seam-endpoint 100T through 1.1T chord
            sweeps, contact/reversal/conormal-side gates, anisotropic trim
            metadata, and an explicit zero-selection fallback baseline.
        [ ] Add their bounded component/root ownership theorem, then add
            combined-error, vertex-neighborhood, G1, tangent, and arbitrary
            endpoint-overlap graph sweeps and theorems.

[ ] Local adaptive solve
    [x] Prepare exact-parameter positive-weight rational Bezier surface spans
        with complete-face unsupported fallback.
    [x] Implement conservative coefficient exclusion and local subdivision.
        [x] Implement initial two-plane homogeneous coefficient exclusion with
            translation-aware numerical margins in the prepared path.
        [x] Add fixed-capacity de Casteljau subdivision and conservative UV/t
            interval isolation on ordinary surface spans.
        [x] Correct each retained ordinary box with a bounded, allocation-free
            projected Newton solve and gate the two-root/contact/miss trend.
        [x] Use fixed center/corner/edge-midpoint seeds and report convergence,
            deduplication, failure, and capacity accounting independently.
        [x] Compare unique same-face prepared-span roots bidirectionally with
            the depth-eight legacy candidate set; require complete legacy
            coverage and classify direct-only tangent-band contacts.
        [x] Add bounded outside-span reparameterization with conservative
            error propagation and positive-weight certification.
        [x] Add production-safe clipping and adaptive termination.
            [x] Add strict-interior Krawczyk termination for regular
                transverse roots and gate its fixed-depth work reduction.
            [x] Gate normalized regular-root partitions and certification
                under translation, arbitrary rotation, and 0.01x/10,000x
                similarities with scaled model tolerances.
            [x] Gate nonuniform affine sphere-to-ellipsoid partitions through
                condition number 1,000, including prepared box-capacity,
                uncertified-root, and 128-leaf legacy traversal fallback.
            [x] Gate the mapped two-root/contact/miss grazing trend in both ray
                directions at conditions 13.3, 100, and 1,000, with analytic
                transformed chord lengths and monotone capability floors.
            [x] Preserve tolerance-resolved ENTER/LEAVE material intervals
                during grazing cleanup instead of deleting them solely by a
                non-affine-invariant normal-angle cutoff.
            [x] Resolve the six remaining high-condition affine grazing
                solver/isolation misses before claiming tangent-limit affine
                invariance or reducing dense-tree fallback.
                [x] Classify every bounded surface/local corrector outcome and
                    record failed residual-to-acceptance ratios.
                [x] Rule out additional isotropic depth, acceptance-tolerance
                    inflation, and weak-direction seed multiplication as safe
                    general repairs.
                [x] Localize the missing roots to opposite sides of the
                    equatorial Bezier-span boundary and demonstrate that a
                    rotated interval hull reduces 104/546 boxes to two.
                [x] Demonstrate one-sided regular/weak scalar bracketing that
                    recovers both condition-1,000 root pairs without tolerance
                    inflation; keep the prototype unpromoted and reverted.
                [x] Permanently apply an exact-audited, allocation-free
                    conditioned equation hull, reducing each unresolved case
                    to at most two terminal boxes without changing hit
                    publication.
                [x] Measure one-sided candidate, Krawczyk, coefficient-
                    precision, monotonic-uniqueness, and complement-coverage
                    boundaries on all twelve localized hard boxes; revert the
                    unqualified prototype after recording the results.
                [x] Implement allocation-free fold-direction bracketing with
                    conservative full-box exclusion/coverage and separate
                    certification of both nearby roots, plus cross-span event
                    deduplication.
                    [x] Add a fixed-work analytic two-root/contact/miss
                        candidate corpus across parameter symmetries and exact
                        binary equation conditioning, with explicit work and
                        capacity gates and no production publication authority.
                    [x] Add allocation-free implicit-graph determinant and
                        fold-strip coverage with bounded depth/workspace,
                        explicit inconclusive outcomes, and exact-contact
                        fallback.
                    [x] Preserve per-coefficient or expansion enclosures and
                        exact-audit fused construction, restriction,
                        Bernstein products, and the selected precision tier.
                        [x] Implement interval Bernstein derivative/product/
                            determinant coefficients through order 30 and
                            exact-audit nominal values at every supported
                            order plus independent uncertainties through 8x8.
                        [x] Preserve determinant value scale by restricting the
                            pre-contraction polynomial to the graph enclosure;
                            exact-audit restriction through order 30.
                        [x] Preserve binary64 per-coefficient intervals through
                            real fused ray-plane construction,
                            reparameterization, and arbitrary local
                            restriction; exact-audit all supported orders.
                        [x] Add and exact-audit a portable error-free expansion
                            or equivalent outward precision tier for the real
                            cases binary64 cannot certify.
                    [x] Prove both one-sided parent boxes complete with a
                        monotonic corridor or equivalent degree certificate;
                        do not use broad complement subdivision as the normal
                        path.
                        [x] Gate the theorem on 36 analytic sheared one-sided
                            corridors paired with strict Krawczyk existence
                            boxes down to determinant ratio 5.68e-14.
                        [x] Apply the unique-corridor and fold-strip proof to
                            both real parents for all six affine misses.
                        [x] Supply strict existence for the remaining six real
                            candidates with opposed endpoint signs on the
                            unique regular graph; complete-parent counts are
                            now 2/2/2/2/2/2.
                    [x] Add every failed certificate/aspect-ratio/precision
                        case to a focused C/C++ fold-solver corpus.
                        [x] Keep all twelve real hard boxes in the focused
                            affine C++ ratchet with candidate, determinant,
                            and Krawczyk-image-excess telemetry.
                    [x] Localize each complete fold root to a certified
                        ray-parameter interval, pair mutually unique adjacent
                        spans, and derive ENTER/LEAVE direction from the
                        certified determinant orientation.
                    [x] Classify resolved, subminimum, ambiguous, and contact
                        gap intervals against an outward `tol->dist / |D|`
                        bound, with model- and direction-scale invariance.
                    [x] Publish only a clean-interior, exactly two-parent,
                        resolved material pair; consume only matching or
                        pair-hull-collapsed local observations and retain
                        fallback for trims, ambiguity, and unsupported
                        topology.
            [x] Keep grazing, singular, and boundary roots on the conservative
                depth-24 path.
            [x] Independently audit outward rounding and coefficient-error
                enclosure before production promotion.
                [x] Gate interval function evaluation, derivative hulls, and
                    products for every supported tensor order and five binary
                    dynamic ranges with an exact-dyadic oracle.
                [x] Audit initial ray-plane coefficient construction,
                    arbitrary sub-box restriction, and rational weight/ray-t
                    bounds with operation-level intervals and exact gates.
                [x] Audit outside-span reparameterization amplification with
                    direct outward interval tensor operators and exact row-
                    sum uncertainty bounds.
            [x] Add contraction-only Bernstein clipping with outward
                convex-hull bounds, bounded contraction, depth charging,
                non-progress termination, and observable conservative
                fallback.
            [x] Gate clipping root enclosure on 2,025 uncertain affine systems
                covering all supported tensor orders and wide binary scales.
            [x] Reduce the 30-ray similarity gate below its recorded 1,602-box
                no-clipping baseline while preserving the complete grazing,
                seam, and final-partition corpora.
            [x] Define the ordinary-root production publication boundary and
                retain explicit legacy fallback for plates, unsupported
                surfaces, workspace exhaustion, uncertified roots, and any
                unqualified physical event.
    [x] Use fixed-capacity allocation-free shot workspace with explicit
        fallback on unsupported weights/order/capacity.
        [x] Bound direct surface order, subdivision stack, trace output, and
            scratch control nets; expose every overflow/high-water result.
        [x] Integrate fixed traversal/root/event arrays and fallback dispatch.
            [x] Add and corpus-gate a 128-entry fixed leaf traversal shadow,
                including total count, exact order, and overflow reporting.
            [x] Promote bounded production leaf collection to the fixed array
                with pre-solve fallback to the legacy list on overflow.
            [x] Move live raw-hit sorting and cleanup to fixed event storage,
                with a clean pre-mutation fallback to the allocating
                implementation on capacity overflow.
    [x] Assemble the uniquely certified continuation and existing event into
        an ordered production material interval and gate both endpoints
        against the implicit oracle and similarity transforms.
    [ ] Replace legacy cleanup authority with the explicit completion-ledger
        and physical-event pipeline.
        [x] Select the prepared result atomically only after whole-ray span,
            box, root, hit, and partition qualification; otherwise leave
            output untouched and run the complete fallback.
        [x] Require prepared/excluded span equality, one stored terminal box
            per isolated box, and a compatible local or fold root for every
            terminal box in the currently supported selectors.
        [x] Store immutable per-box dispositions and certified root records
            independently from physical event records.
        [x] Derive ordinary interior ENTER/LEAVE from bounded oriented
            determinant evidence rather than nominal-normal cleanup.
        [ ] Resolve supported interior, fold, edge, crack, and vertex
            clusters into ENTER/LEAVE/CONTACT events without deleting source
            evidence.
            [x] Resolve clean ordinary interior and strict cross-span fold
                roots into provenance-preserving ENTER/LEAVE events.
            [x] Integrate the narrowly certified one-root/one-continuation
                manifold seam pair with complete box/root ownership.
                [x] Certify finite oblique two-root contact lobes with complete
                    edge/surface-frame intervals and per-box material-sector
                    links.
                [x] Prove one connected rootless source-box component contains
                    only the existing regular root by strict Krawczyk inclusion
                    over its complete rectangular UV hull.
                    [x] Ratchet the shared component/hull proof with connected
                        higher-order, UV/t-disconnected, multiple-root,
                        singular-Jacobian, and invalid-provenance systems.
            [x] Integrate closed manifold planar cyclic vertex fans with exact
                line witnesses, complete source ownership, and mixed ordinary
                event streams.
            [x] Integrate exact interior two-trim manifold-edge clusters,
                unchanged-state contacts, multiple edge events, periodic
                same-surface duplicates, and mixed ordinary/edge streams.
            [ ] Integrate non-exact tolerance-near edge clusters, arbitrary
                gaps/overlaps, sector-boundary tangency, and edge/vertex
                neighborhood interactions.
        [ ] Assemble a complete {0,1} solid-state stream and apply the outward
            minimum-segment classifier before atomic publication.
            [x] Assemble and publish resolved clean regular/fold material
                streams, narrowly certified seam pairs, and completely
                certified empty rays without legacy cleanup authority.
            [ ] Qualify direct subminimum-contact and general near-trim event
                publication.
    [ ] Reduce default tree density only after publication equivalence passes.
    [ ] Version and verify prep cache changes.

[ ] Drawing and corpus completion
    [ ] Improve adaptive curve/surface plotting independently of ray trees.
    [ ] Pass analytic, Cobb, stratified STEP, and full corpus gates.
    [ ] Re-run FRAME.g prep/RSS baseline and document improvement.


VERIFICATION LOG
----------------

Ownership implementation:

  * include/brep/surfacetree.h and src/libbrep/opennurbs_ext.cpp now provide
    releaseRootNode() and releaseCurveTree().

  * brep_specific is now constructed/destructed as a C++ object and owns a
    vector of CurveTrees.  Teardown order is BVH, CurveTrees, then ON_Brep.

  * brep_build_bvh transfers each builder's CurveTree and BBNode root, destroys
    the temporary SurfaceTree immediately, and no longer writes
    ON_BrepFace::m_face_user.p.

  * Cache deserialization records each new CurveTree in the same owner vector.

Verification commands and results:

  cmake --build .build --target librt rt_primitive_brep -j8
    PASS

  ctest --test-dir .build -R '^rt_primitive_brep$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 1/1

  cmake --build .build --target rt_cache -j8
    PASS

  ctest --test-dir .build -R '^rt_cache_' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7, including serial/parallel, repeated identical/different BREP,
    and hierarchy cache cases.

  ctest --test-dir .build \
    -R '^regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01)$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 3/3

Newton hardening:

  * The solver returns explicit converged, duplicate, outside-domain,
    singular-Jacobian, stalled, iteration-limit, evaluation, non-finite, and
    capacity outcomes.

  * An initial positional root is accepted before testing the Jacobian.  A
    singular parameterization uses surface_EvNormal for a finite unit normal.

  * EvPoint/Ev1Der results, residuals, Jacobian columns, Newton steps, root t,
    and normals are checked for failure and non-finite values.  The random
    singular-Jacobian jitter was removed.

In-memory correctness corpus:

  * src/librt/tests/brep_ray.cpp constructs one analytic rt_ell_internal,
    converts that exact internal with ft_brep, preps both paths, and shoots
    identical rays without generating .g files.

  * Exact north-pole, south-pole/reverse, and two regular-axis rays compare
    ordered segment endpoints and validate converted-BREP normals over 16
    identical repetitions.

  * Seam-boundary inward rays and rays beginning inside are hard paired gates.
    The outward surface-start discrepancy is retained as a known-defect
    ratchet.  Additional fixtures repeat pole, seam, and inside checks on a
    translated 0.01 mm sphere and on a radius-10,000 mm sphere translated to
    million-unit coordinates.

  * A logarithmic and target-chord positive-h sweep enforces deterministic,
    non-restarting, non-growing BREP interval behavior.  Chords at least the
    model distance tolerance must resolve with analytic endpoint agreement;
    smaller chords may collapse to a contact-sized segment or miss but may not
    reintroduce material larger than the minimum size.  Exact tangency and all
    representable mirrored negative-h samples must be misses in both paths.

  * A 20,000-line Cauchy-Crofton check estimates area and volume independently
    on the implicit sphere and its converted BREP.  Both must be within 3% of
    analytic 4*pi*R^2 and 4*pi*R^3/3, and the two representations must agree
    within 1%.  This is the first aggregate ground-truth gate; exact shared
    bounding sphere and per-line differences remain to be implemented.

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
    PASS

  ctest --test-dir .build -R '^rt_brep_ray$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 1/1

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --grazing-report
    REPORT: BREP follows the analytic square-root chord trend through a chord
    of one model distance tolerance, reports a contact-sized segment at 0.9
    tolerance, and is a miss by 0.61 tolerance.  Exact tangency and every
    sampled negative clearance are misses.  The raw solver/contact status is
    not yet instrumented, so CONTACT here is the test's segment-length class.

Conditioned root convergence:

  * The two ray-plane residuals are evaluated relative to the ray origin.  A
    root must satisfy both the 1e-7 perpendicular ceiling and the corresponding
    first-order ray-distance estimate based on |N dot D|/|D|.  A 1e-13 floor
    prevents an exact double root from requiring literal floating-point zero.

  * Simply reducing the fixed residual threshold to 1e-9 or 1e-12 repaired the
    R=10 tangent but lost the million-unit translated north-pole root.  A fixed
    1e-8 happened to pass the current corpus but retained a smaller tangent
    false interval.  Those rejected experiments demonstrate why the
    conditioning term and translated fixture are both necessary.

  cmake --build .build --target \
    librt rt_primitive_brep rt_brep_ray rt_cache -j8
    PASS

  ctest --test-dir .build -j4 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 12/12

Shared-line Crofton and final partitions:

  * The test now serializes the implicit sphere and its converted BREP into
    separate in-memory databases, prepares normal rt_i instances, and shoots
    each line through rt_shootray.  Fixed-capacity records retain every final
    partition endpoint and post-Boolean entry/exit normal.

  * One fixed-seed 32,000-line set is generated from an explicitly shared
    bounding sphere using the production Crofton point-pairing algorithm.
    Nested checkpoints at 2,000, 8,000, and 32,000 rays report independent
    area/volume estimates and sample standard errors.  A four-standard-error
    confidence band guards both implicit and BREP convergence to the analytic
    sphere values.

  * All 32,000 final partition lists agree, with no tangent-band exceptions.
    Maximum paired endpoint error is approximately 9.69e-8 mm.  Signed and
    absolute total chord differences are approximately 6.74e-5 mm and
    8.15e-5 mm respectively over the full set; both aggregate representations
    remain far inside the paired 0.1 percent gate.

  * The harness is generalized to any ft_brep-capable implicit internal with
    explicit shared bounds.  Five additional fixtures each retain 8,000 shared
    lines: a translated oblate ellipsoid, translated ARB8 box, RCC, truncated
    cone, and torus.  Their analytic surface areas and volumes are confidence
    gates, not merely paired comparisons.

  * Exact directed final-partition gates cover ellipsoid pole and periodic
    seam, ARB8 forward/reverse faces and opposite vertices, cylinder/cone axes
    and periodic seams, and torus forward/reverse two-interval rays, central
    hole miss, and tube-vertical hit.  Entry/exit normals must be finite, unit,
    and correctly oriented after Boolean processing.

  * Across 72,000 shared lines for all six fixtures there are zero differing
    partition lists and zero tangent-band exceptions.  Every maximum BREP/
    implicit endpoint delta is below 1e-7 mm; the planar ARB8 maximum is about
    5.68e-14 mm.

BREP-leaf CSG hierarchy corpus:

  * Each implicit region is duplicated without changing its Boolean tree.
    Only the two leaf objects are replaced with their exact ft_brep exports in
    the comparison database.  Normal rt_shootray Boolean weaving therefore
    sees identical operators, transforms, region semantics, and tolerances.

  * The current hard fixtures are disjoint sphere union, overlapping sphere
    union, equal-sphere intersection lens, concentric sphere subtraction, and
    box minus a through cylinder.  They cover disjoint/merged intervals,
    intersection, internal cavity orientation, planar and curved leaves, and
    subtraction-generated final partitions without depending on ON_Boolean.

  * All 40,000 shared CSG lines have identical final partition lists and no
    tangent-band exceptions.  Directed forward/reverse multi-component,
    merged-union, lens, cavity, cross-hole, through-hole miss, and solid-wall
    rays also match analytic endpoints.  Maximum paired endpoint error remains
    below 1e-7 mm.

Cobb sphere baseline:

  * include/brep/cobb.h and src/libbrep/cobb.cpp now own the reusable Cobb
    support definition.  The proc-db generator calls the library helper rather
    than retaining its original second copy of the 25 homogeneous control
    points.  brep_invalid.cpp still has a duplicate to remove when that invalid
    fixture is migrated.

  * ON_Brep_CobbSphereUnsewn retains the 6-face/24-vertex/24-edge plate-mode
    representation.  ON_Brep_CobbSphereSewn creates a valid, solid, oriented
    6-face/8-vertex/12-edge manifold, with two trims on every edge.  Corner
    identity uses a scale-aware numerical roundoff bound, not modeling or ray
    tolerance.

  * A 33 by 33 grid on each support surface measures maximum radial error of
    approximately 8.88e-15 mm at radius 10 mm for both forms.  Small translated
    (R=0.01) and million-coordinate translated (R=10,000) sewn topology and
    radial error are also hard gates.

  * Directed rays hit face centers, an edge seam, and a three-face vertex.
    All 8,000 shared Crofton lines have identical implicit/Cobb partition lists
    and no tangent-band exceptions.  Maximum endpoint difference is about
    9.69e-8 mm.  The shared corpus now contains 120,000 lines.

  * The bowed-seam fixture preserves both edge endpoints, modifies homogeneous
    CVs without changing their weights, measures the resulting discrepancy
    from both trim lifts at 257 samples, and iterates the requested control-net
    displacement until measured g is within 0.1 percent of its target.  The
    observed maximum calibration error is approximately 3.5e-15 mm.

  * The signed matrix covers g/T = 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.9, 1, 1.1, 2, and 10;
    h/T = 100, 10, 2, 1.1, 1, 0.9, 0.5, 0.1, 0, -0.1, -1, -10, and -100;
    and both directions for every line.  It checks repeatability and emits a
    CSV table with root separation, partition counts, chord lengths, endpoint
    error, validity, and uncertainty classification under --cobb-report.

  * The current 416-ray baseline has 284 oracle differences (including the
    expected tangency-amplified endpoint changes of a deliberately distorted
    surface), 15 below-envelope whole-interval leaks, one reversal
    inconsistency, and 32 zero-chord h=0 contact records.  No below-envelope
    leak occurs at h greater than 1.01g; regression beyond that bound fails.

  * Private in-librt shot tracing records intersected tree leaves, structured
    solver outcomes, every converged candidate root, trim classification,
    normal orientation, and hit counts after each legacy cleanup stage.  It
    has a fixed 64-root capacity, reports overflow, and is enabled only by the
    correctness test entry point; normal production shots retain the same
    path with a null trace pointer.

  * Trace accounting proves that 14/15 below-envelope leaks have fewer than
    two unique candidate t values, zero are lost during trim classification,
    and one reaches cleanup with at least two unique candidates.  In the
    representative inward g/T=1, h/T=0.9 case, both candidates are clean hits
    from face 1 at the same root to about 7e-14 mm.  They are independent tree
    seeds, not the two intended crossings.  The CSV report includes each
    candidate, solver-status histograms, unique-root count, and every cleanup
    stage so future seam work can ratchet the actual failure mechanism.

  * Normal and cached prep now derive compact records for each two-trim edge.
    Exact-parameter NURBS forms are split at every nonempty knot span and
    stored as positive-weight rational Beziers with Euclidean control-hull
    bounds.  The records are rebuilt from the cached BREP, so serialized BVH
    cache version zero remains valid and unchanged.

  * The trace path uses a conservative infinite-line test against each span
    box expanded by the declared edge tolerance.  It separately records a
    fixed 17-point/32-step bounded closest-point estimate, edge index, both
    incident faces, edge and ray parameters, exact distance, tolerance, and
    candidate-span count without allocating per ray.  The estimate is an
    observation; the box test is the conservative exclusion result.

  * Every one of the 15 below-envelope leaks identifies the intended target
    edge inside its declared tolerance.  Across the complete signed and
    reversed matrix, target-edge distance differs from analytic |h| by at
    most about 3.59e-15 mm and no target observation beyond the edge envelope
    is marked eligible.  Each eligible target also has a conservatively
    selected prepared span.  The Cobb fixture has 12 eligible edges and 12
    prepared spans.

  * For tolerance-qualified edges, the trace maps the closest edge fraction
    to both incident trims, applies trim reversal, evaluates both surface
    lifts, and constructs the local material sector from loop-interior
    conormals and oriented face normals.  It records lift distances, face/ray
    normal dots, ray/edge alignment, sector validity, and whether the closest
    ray point is inside, on, or outside that sector.

  * Three independent sector fixtures now cover a converted ARB8's sharp
    90-degree convex edge, a capped L-shaped extrusion's 270-degree re-entrant
    edge, and a converted sphere's two-trim periodic same-face seam.  Offsets
    at +/-T/2 and exact contact all classify correctly in both ray directions.
    On the bowed Cobb sweep, all 15 leaks are authorized, span-selected, valid
    inside-sector observations; the initial effective-envelope policy expands
    qualified target states to 152 inside, 32 contact, and 68 outside.  Maximum
    error in the measured target lift
    discrepancy is about 2.51e-15 mm.

  * Prepared edge records now distinguish raw declared tolerance, model
    tolerance, inferred status, sampled maximum edge/trim-lift discrepancy,
    effective envelope, and authorization.  Edge span expansion and all later
    sector/closure work require the discrepancy-authorized bit.  A five-case
    g=2T Cobb metadata fixture permanently distinguishes correct, unset,
    explicit-zero, half-discrepancy, and double-discrepancy declarations.
    Similarity fixtures require all length-valued fields to scale together.

  * Cache deserialization rebuilds edge records with the active rti tolerance
    and rebuilds prepared surface spans before using deserialized trees.  The
    derived records are still not serialized, so cache version zero remains
    compatible.

  * The closure pass runs after direction cleanup and only
    considers solid, non-plate BREPs with one unmatched final hit.  A candidate
    must be a tolerance-qualified valid inside sector, share the hit's face,
    and have the t ordering required for the opposite event direction.  The
    bowed matrix hard-gates one and only one target-edge candidate for every
    legacy below-envelope leak.  Production activation additionally requires
    the measured face/edge discrepancy to be no larger than rti_tol.dist;
    both incident trim lifts at the actual event parameter must independently
    be within rti_tol.dist.  Imported topology tolerances larger than the
    model tolerance cannot silently broaden closure, and the sampled prep
    discrepancy is not treated as sufficient proof by itself.

  * A dedicated similarity corpus transforms the representative inward
    g/T=1, h/T=0.9 bowed case and its contact/exterior companions.  Identity,
    rigid rotation/translation, translated 0.01x scale, and translated 10,000x
    scale preserve the target edge, candidate span, inside/contact/outside
    state, unique closure count, missing enter/leave direction, and event
    ordering and the published repaired interval in both ray directions.
    BREP edge/vertex and ray model tolerances are explicitly scaled as model-
    space lengths.

  * Prepared face records now decompose exact-parameter NURBS surfaces at all
    nonempty knot rectangles into positive-weight rational Bezier patches.
    Each patch retains its original UV domain and a conservative control-hull
    bound.  Trace-mode homogeneous ray-plane coefficient hulls reject spans
    whose first or second numerator cannot contain zero.  The roundoff bound
    accounts for large-coordinate subtraction.  Cobb has six supported faces
    and six spans; the representative near-tangent line retains two spans and
    this count is unchanged by all similarity fixtures.

  * After a unique authorized closure is found, the resolver reflects the
    existing adjacent-face UV root across the associated trim tangent and run
    a fixed-budget, line-searched solve on a bounded extension of that
    prepared Bezier support.  Every current leak produces one correctly
    oriented opposite event.  The maximum endpoint error against the implicit
    sphere over all 15 is approximately 2.71e-8 mm.  Continuation attempts,
    candidate count, face/UV/t, residual, normal dot, and iteration count are
    available in --cobb-report.  A certified continuation now becomes a
    CRACK_HIT endpoint retaining face, UV, normal, and adjacency provenance.

  * Scalar de Casteljau restriction now subdivides each non-excluded
    ray-plane coefficient pair using a fixed 64-box depth-first stack and
    maximum order 16 scratch nets.  Retained depth-24 boxes include global UV
    bounds and rational-convex-hull ray-t intervals.  Every bowed-matrix raw
    Newton root must fall inside one such UV/t box; overflow or silent loss is
    a test failure.  The machine report emits every retained box.

  * The analytic sphere grazing sweep independently requires both roots to be
    covered while their chord is at least T, and requires no single box to
    contain both once the chord is at least 10T.  Exact tangency retains a
    conservative contact box but produces no final segment.  Negative-h
    ambiguity is measured on every representable mirrored sample and may not
    spread beyond 1e-6 T; the present largest is approximately 2.27e-9 T.

  * Each retained ordinary box now seeds a projected, bounded local corrector
    over its prepared Bezier support.  For chord >= T, all 36 sphere cases
    recover both analytic roots with maximum endpoint error about 8.56e-8 mm.
    The 23 positive sub-T cases and exact tangency each form one contact-sized
    cluster.  Miss-side local candidates are confined to about 2.84e-10 T.
    The nine deterministic seeds per box produce at most 72 attempts per
    sphere line and 54 per bowed Cobb line, use fixed trace capacity, and
    perform no ray-time allocation.  Candidate roots, residuals, normals,
    iterations, failures, and deduplication counts are emitted under
    --cobb-report.

  * The classifier similarity gate includes local-root failure counts, scaled
    residuals, normalized regular-root positions, and the physical cluster
    count at exact contact.  Identity, rigid rotation/translation, translated
    0.01x, and translated 10,000x fixtures pass when their model-space
    tolerances are scaled with the geometry.  Raw contact representatives may
    differ with floating conditioning but always collapse to one cluster.

  * A fixed 64-entry preliminary root-cluster array now classifies same-face
    observations.  Resolved sphere grazing produces ordered ENTER/LEAVE
    clusters, tangency produces one CONTACT, cluster capacity never exhausts,
    and the bowed leak histogram is 14/0/1 for one/two/three clusters.  This
    remains upstream of trim/topology compatibility and material winding.

  * A caller-owned 128-pointer leaf array now shadows the std::list surface-
    tree traversal.  All traced corpus rays require identical leaf count and
    pointer order.  Current maxima are 8 for the sphere grazing sweep, 12 for
    the bowed Cobb matrix, and 68 for the 0.01x transformed classifier.  The
    fixed overload counts beyond capacity and exposes overflow.  At this
    shadow checkpoint the production solver still consumed the list, so no
    shot result changed.

  * Production now consumes the fixed leaf array when it fits.  Overflow is
    detected before solving and selects the legacy list path.  Trace mode
    still constructs both and exposes fallback state, so order equivalence
    remains continuously checked while normal bounded rays avoid list-node
    allocation during leaf discovery.

  * Production trim classification no longer constructs a filtered
    std::list for every converged Newton candidate.  It applies the same UV
    bounding-box filter while scanning the SurfaceTree's prepared
    m_trims_above list and feeds the retained BRNodes to a common classifier.
    This removes the per-candidate list-node allocations without changing the
    prepared tree or the established tolerance policy.

  * The former allocating path is retained as isTrimmedAllocating for
    transition-time trace diagnostics only.  Every traced candidate in the
    sphere/grazing, similarity, edge-sector, seam-metadata, and 416-ray bowed
    Cobb corpora must match candidate count, trim status, exact selected
    BRNode pointer, and bitwise-identical closest-trim distance.  Any mismatch
    fails rt_brep_ray.  The legacy closest-node semantics, including the
    under-trim update rule, are deliberately preserved pending a separately
    justified correctness audit.

  * brep_hit no longer retains a const face reference whose assignment
    operator wrote through const_cast and could overwrite ON_BrepFace
    geometry.  It now holds a non-owning const pointer and copies that pointer
    safely.  The uninitialized active member and its only consumer, an unused
    debug helper, were removed along with the unused MissList declaration.

  * A fixed 128-hit workspace now collects raw production hits, performs a
    stable insertion sort, and applies index-based equivalents of every
    legacy near-miss, near-hit, grazing, duplicate, and direction cleanup
    stage.  Solid and plate segment publication consume the fixed result
    directly.  Workspace slots are assigned in full only as hits arrive, so
    the other capacity slots are not eagerly initialized for every shot.

  * Trace mode still runs the legacy std::list path from the same solved hits.
    It bitwise-compares every raw hit after stable sorting, hard-gates the hit
    count after each cleanup stage, and compares every final hit field.  The
    complete directed/Crofton/similarity/metadata/Cobb corpus has zero raw-
    order, stage-count, or final-event mismatches.  Observed raw-hit high-water
    marks are 4 for sphere grazing and the transformed classifier, and 6 for
    the bowed Cobb matrix, versus capacity 128.

  * Hit-workspace overflow is detected before cleanup or segment publication.
    Production then reruns the deterministic surface solve into the legacy
    list; trace mode exposes overflow and fallback as hard-gated counters.
    Surface-leaf traversal has its independent 128-pointer fallback.  Thus the
    bounded common path avoids dynamic leaf, trim-query, raw-hit, sort, and
    cleanup containers, while unsupported capacity cases retain correctness.

  * Outside-span continuation rectangles are reparameterized algebraically
    into Bernstein form.  Outward interval one-dimensional transformation
    matrices are applied directly as a tensor operator to the complete source
    coefficient intervals, bounding both inherited uncertainty and transform
    roundoff without intermediate split dependency growth.  A certificate
    requires every transformed weight interval to remain positive and the
    fixed isolator to retain only boxes belonging to the recovered root
    cluster.  No retained box may cover the original root.

  * All 15 legacy one-event crack cases are certified and repaired in
    production.  The worst eligible case visits 93 boxes with stack high-
    water 20 and retains a t cluster no wider than approximately 3.47e-5 mm.
    Every repaired endpoint matches the implicit sphere within 1e-7 mm.  The
    416-ray matrix reports zero below-envelope leaks, while g > T, contact,
    exterior, ambiguous, edge-overflow, and edge-evaluation-failure cases do
    not activate closure.  The CSV continuation record exposes certificate
    counts, capacity state, t bounds, and the resulting interval.

  * Closure also requires the repaired material interval to be at least the
    model distance tolerance after conversion through |ray direction|.
    Certificate t comparisons use a span/coordinate-conditioned numerical
    tolerance rather than a fixed model-space constant.  These conditions and
    the published segment endpoints pass identity, rigid, 0.01x, and 10,000x
    similarity cases when geometry and model tolerances scale together.

  * Incident edge/trim correspondence no longer assumes equal normalized
    parameter speed.  The discrepancy sampler, both material-sector frames,
    and continuation reflection seed use the same fixed-work geometric lift
    projection.  The nonlinear c=0.05/c=20 trim fixture preserves the locus
    to 2.48e-16 despite a 0.452 midpoint parameter shift, and retains the
    identity case's sector states, closure decision, certificate, and final
    segment in both directions.  The normal full corpus passes in 8.46
    seconds on the current host (versus 8.81 seconds immediately before this
    change; these single-run timings are informational, not a performance
    threshold).

  cmake --build .build --target \
    librt rt_primitive_brep rt_brep_ray rt_cache rt_crofton -j8
    PASS

  ctest --test-dir .build -j4 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray|rt_crofton|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 13/13; rt_brep_ray completes in approximately 8 seconds with
    trace-only edge qualification, fixed leaf-traversal equivalence, and
    allocating/no-allocation trim equivalence enabled across all 416 bowed-
    seam rays.  The matrix retains 15 legacy one-event cases, repairs all 15
    in production, and has zero below-envelope leaks.  Repeated after the
    geometric edge/trim correspondence change and nonlinear parameter fixture:
    13/13, with rt_brep_ray at 8.70 seconds in the parallel gate.
    Repeated after the adaptive seam-gap shadow certificate and explicit
    4,096-cell exhaustion fixture: 13/13, with NIST03_MISS_01 at about 0.7
    seconds and rt_brep_ray at about 10 seconds.  The bowed certificate uses
    2,046 cells at depth 9 with maximum interval width about 0.0823 T; the
    three-seam fixture reports two bounded and one exhausted at exactly the
    solid-wide budget.
    Repeated after bidirectional prepared/legacy root coverage and the
    arbitrary-axis similarity expansion and one-to-one scale-aware matching:
    13/13, with rt_brep_ray at 10.34 seconds and NIST03_MISS_01 at 0.80
    seconds.
    Repeated after allocation-free face-wide trim classification and physical
    prepared/legacy event-cluster comparison: 13/13, with rt_brep_ray at
    10.23 seconds and NIST03_MISS_01 at 0.82 seconds.  The sphere and bowed
    Cobb matrices retain zero trim/class/direction/adjacency mismatch.
    Repeated after fixed prepared-event cleanup and final-partition oracle
    classification: 13/13, with rt_brep_ray at 10.29 seconds and
    NIST03_MISS_01 at 0.80 seconds.  The sole final change is an implicit-
    oracle improvement in the reverse inward-bowed Cobb case.
    Repeated after provisional strict-interior Krawczyk termination for
    ordinary transverse roots: 13/13, with rt_brep_ray at 9.30 seconds.  Six
    oblique sphere rays reduce subdivision visits from the measured 1,038-box
    fixed-depth baseline to 294 while preserving all partitions.  Grazing
    matrices retain zero early terminations.
    Repeated after the adaptive-root similarity matrix: 13/13, with
    rt_brep_ray at 10.14 seconds.  All 30 transformed rays and 60 regular
    roots retain normalized oracle partitions and early qualification.
    Repeated after outward interval function/Jacobian evaluation and the
    exact-dyadic enclosure gate: 13/13, with rt_brep_ray at 10.36 seconds.
    All 326,295 permanent enclosure checks pass before the ray corpus.
    Repeated after initial coefficient, arbitrary restriction, and rational
    ray-t interval bounds: 13/13 in 13.88 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 12.58
    seconds.  All 873,243 permanent enclosure checks pass before the corpus.
    Repeated after direct outward interval outside-span reparameterization:
    13/13 in 25.64 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 24.37 seconds.  All 1,603,793
    permanent enclosure checks pass before the corpus.
    Repeated after contraction-only Bernstein clipping and its 2,025-case
    affine enclosure gate: 13/13 in 25.30 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 24.07
    seconds.  All geometry classifications and published partitions remain
    unchanged; the 30-ray shadow similarity matrix visits 964 boxes.
    Repeated after strict ordinary-root publication, explicit fallback
    accounting, and an independent forced-legacy test entry: 13/13 in 69.03
    seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 68.99 seconds.  All 30 similarity rays select
    the prepared production partition; resolved grazing and exact-tangent rays
    report uncertified fallback.
    Repeated after the nonuniform affine ellipsoid selection/fallback matrix:
    13/13 in 69.56 seconds, with rt_brep_ray at 69.52 seconds.  The focused
    `--affine-only` gate covers 36 rays through condition 1,000 and passes.
    Repeated after the 78-ray mapped affine grazing ratchet and the
    tolerance-resolved grazing-pair cleanup: the focused `--affine-only` gate
    and the complete normal `rt_brep_ray` corpus pass.  Ordinary affine rays
    remain 36/36; the grazing output reports six bounded high-condition
    resolved gaps and no reversal inconsistency or classification restart.
    Repeated after permanent conditioned equation-hull exclusion and its
    2,187,000-case exact-dyadic audit: the full optimized corpus and focused
    `--affine-only` and `--interval-only` gates pass.  All 36 ordinary affine
    rays select prepared production with no fallback; their surface-box visits
    fall from 16,860 to 970.  The six known grazing gaps remain unchanged but
    retain at most two terminal boxes each.
    Repeated after the fixed-work fold candidate corpus: focused
    `--fold-only`, `--interval-only`, and `--affine-only` gates and the full
    optimized corpus pass.  The new matrix covers 200 analytic systems and
    325 expected roots through 2^-24 separation with at most 61 regular
    solves.  The complete corpus again ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`; production grazing behavior and the
    970-box ordinary affine baseline remain unchanged.
    Repeated after exact-audited Bernstein determinant arithmetic and the
    synthetic one-sided proof matrix: `--interval-only` passes 172,800 nominal
    and 9,408 uncertain determinant coefficients; `--fold-only` passes 36
    root certificates and 36 uniqueness corridors.  The full optimized
    corpus again ends with `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS` and leaves
    production hit selection unchanged.
    Repeated after real per-coefficient restriction and the shadow fold proof
    probe: `--interval-only` exact-audits 546,750 common-error plus 546,750
    independently uncertain restrictions; `--fold-only` retains all 200
    systems/325 roots and 36 certificates/corridors; `--affine-only` recovers
    all twelve hard candidates and records zero real binary64 certificates.
    The complete optimized corpus again ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`; production partitions are unchanged.
    Repeated after the portable expansion tier and real certificate ratchet:
    `--interval-only` passes 2,250 expansion function, 324,000 derivative, 45
    product, 108 coefficient, 546,750 restriction, and two conservative-
    fallback checks; `--fold-only`
    recertifies all 36 analytic roots; and `--affine-only` passes the six-case
    real ratchet with certificate floors 2/2/1/1/0/0 and zero expansion
    failures.  The complete optimized corpus again ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`; all shared implicit/BREP Crofton
    fixtures report zero differing lines and production partitions remain
    unchanged.  Cache-write warnings in the restricted execution environment
    are nonfatal and exercise the existing uncached continuation path.
    Repeated after bounded Krawczyk contraction and regular-graph endpoint
    existence: process-sharded optimized `--fold-only`, `--affine-only`, and
    `--interval-only` pass.  The fold aggregate is
    `boundary=145/72/778`; the affine ratchet has expansion floors
    2/2/2/2/0/0 and complete-parent counts 2/2/2/2/2/2.  The full optimized
    corpus again ends with `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`, all shared
    implicit/BREP Crofton fixtures have zero differing lines, and production
    partitions remain unchanged.  The broader optimized CTest group passes
    13/13 with four-way process parallelism.
    Repeated after cross-span fold-event localization, classification, and
    strict clean-interior production promotion: process-sharded optimized
    `--fold-only`, `--affine-only`, and `--interval-only` pass.  The private
    gap classifier passes 36 resolved/subminimum/ambiguous/contact cases under
    model and non-unit direction scaling.  The affine sweep reports
    `resolved-gaps=0` and all six complete fold pairs publish oracle-matching
    chords.  The complete optimized corpus again ends with
    `BREP ray correctness corpus: PASS`; every shared implicit/BREP Crofton
    fixture has zero differing lines.  Cache-write warnings in the restricted
    environment remain expected and nonfatal.
    The remaining optimized cache, Crofton, primitive-conversion, and three
    NURBS regression checks pass 12/12 with four-way CTest parallelism in
    5.16 seconds; the full direct ray corpus supplies the thirteenth gate.

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
    PASS

  cmake -S . -B .build-asan -G Ninja \
    -DBRLCAD_EXT_DIR=/home/cyapp/bext/build \
    -DBRLCAD_ENABLE_ADDRESS_SANITIZER=ON \
    -DBRLCAD_ENABLE_UNDEFINED_SANITIZER=ON \
    -DBRLCAD_OPTIMIZED=OFF -DBRLCAD_DEBUGGING=ON \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
  cmake --build .build-asan --target librt rt_brep_ray rt_cache -j8
  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0 UBSAN_OPTIONS=print_stacktrace=1 \
    .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray
    PASS: full ray corpus, no ASan or UBSan diagnostics.  Leak detection is
    disabled because LeakSanitizer is incompatible with the host ptrace
    wrapper; leak qualification remains open.
    Repeated after the adaptive seam-gap pass with halt_on_error=1: the direct
    full corpus and the focused 12/12 ASan/UBSan gate pass without diagnostics.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray
    PASS after geometric edge/trim parameter correspondence and the nonlinear
    trim-reparameterization fixture, with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0 UBSAN_OPTIONS=print_stacktrace=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan -j4 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 12/12 after fixed-hit and certified crack-closure production
    promotion, including solid and plate segment publication, with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostics.  Repeated after geometric edge/trim correspondence and
    nonlinear parameter invariance: 12/12 in 38.57 seconds, again with no
    ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after bidirectional root coverage and arbitrary-axis similarity
    expansion with one-to-one scale-aware matching and halt_on_error=1: 12/12
    in 40.72 seconds, with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after face-wide trim classification and physical event-cluster
    comparison with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in 41.10 seconds, with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after fixed prepared-event cleanup, five-stage observation, and
    final-partition oracle classification with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in
    40.55 seconds, with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after provisional Krawczyk termination and conservative interval
    expansion with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in 33.20 seconds; rt_brep_ray takes
    33.15 seconds with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.  After hard-gating zero
    adaptive termination in both grazing matrices and avoiding unnecessary
    ray-t interval work on nonterminal boxes, a direct final rt_brep_ray pass
    takes 25.16 seconds without a diagnostic.
    Repeated after the adaptive-root similarity matrix with halt_on_error=1:
    12/12 in 36.26 seconds; rt_brep_ray takes 36.22 seconds with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after outward interval function/Jacobian evaluation and the
    exact-dyadic enclosure gate with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in 37.29 seconds;
    rt_brep_ray takes 37.25 seconds with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after initial coefficient, arbitrary restriction, and rational
    ray-t interval bounds with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in 54.91 seconds;
    rt_brep_ray takes 54.87 seconds with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after direct outward interval outside-span reparameterization
    with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in 93.19 seconds; rt_brep_ray takes 93.15
    seconds with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after contraction-only Bernstein clipping with halt_on_error=1:
    12/12 in 91.04 seconds; rt_brep_ray takes 91.00 seconds with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after strict ordinary-root production publication and forced
    legacy comparison with halt_on_error=1: 12/12 in 361.99 seconds;
    rt_brep_ray takes 361.95 seconds with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after the initial nonuniform affine matrix: 12/12 in 359.82
    seconds; rt_brep_ray takes 359.79 seconds with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    After extending the matrix through condition 1,000, the focused
    `--affine-only` ASan/UBSan run also passes without a diagnostic.
    Repeated after affine grazing cleanup and trend qualification with
    halt_on_error=1: the focused 78-ray `--affine-only` run passes with no ASan
    or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after structured surface/local corrector outcomes and bounded
    failure-ratio telemetry: the focused 78-ray `--affine-only` run passes
    with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after conditioned equation-hull exclusion with halt-on-error:
    focused `--affine-only` and `--interval-only` runs pass with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic.  The latter audits 2,187,000 transformed coefficients.
    Repeated after the bounded fold candidate implementation with halt-on-
    error: the focused `--fold-only` 200-system matrix passes with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after determinant and one-sided proof qualification with halt-on-
    error: focused `--fold-only` and `--interval-only` pass with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after per-coefficient restriction and the shadow real-fold probe
    with halt-on-error: focused `--interval-only`, `--fold-only`, and
    `--affine-only` pass with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after fixed-size expansion coefficient/restriction/Krawczyk
    arithmetic and the real certificate ratchet: focused `--interval-only`,
    `--fold-only`, and `--affine-only` pass with no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.
    Repeated after implicit-graph determinant and fold-strip coverage:
    process-sharded `--interval-only`, `--fold-only`, and `--affine-only` pass
    with halt_on_error=1 and no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.  The interval gate
    includes 33,408 exact determinant-restriction checks through order 30.
    Repeated after bounded Krawczyk contraction and regular-graph endpoint
    existence: process-sharded `--fold-only` and `--affine-only` pass with
    halt_on_error=1 and no ASan or UBSan diagnostic.  The fold gate proves all
    72 positive endpoint cases and rejects all 73 root-free/contact cases.
    The separately sharded exhaustive `--interval-only` gate also passes with
    no diagnostic.
    Repeated after strict cross-span fold production with halt_on_error=1:
    process-sharded `--fold-only` and `--affine-only` pass with no ASan or
    UBSan diagnostic, including all six newly promoted grazing chords.  The
    exhaustive `--interval-only` gate passes separately and includes the 36
    model/direction-scale fold-gap classifier cases.
    Leak detection remains disabled because the host ptrace wrapper makes
    LeakSanitizer terminate before the test begins.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0 UBSAN_OPTIONS=print_stacktrace=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan -j4 -R '^rt_cache_.*$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 serial and parallel ordinary/cached prep ownership tests, with
    no ASan or UBSan diagnostics.

  cmake --build .build-asan --target \
    rt_primitive_brep analyze_nhit NIST_MBE_PMI_3.g -j8
  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0 UBSAN_OPTIONS=print_stacktrace=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan -j4 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 4/4 conversion and NURBS regression tests, with no ASan or UBSan
    diagnostics.  Together with rt_brep_ray and the cache matrix, the focused
    sanitizer gate is 12/12.  The combined 12-test command also passes in one
    run (approximately 38 seconds), ruling out ordering dependence among the
    focused sanitizer fixtures.

  cmake -S . -B .build-tsan -G Ninja \
    -DBRLCAD_EXT_DIR=/home/cyapp/bext/build \
    -DBRLCAD_ENABLE_THREAD_SANITIZER=ON \
    -DBRLCAD_OPTIMIZED=OFF -DBRLCAD_DEBUGGING=ON \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
  cmake --build .build-tsan --target librt rt_cache -j8
  env TSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:second_deadlock_stack=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-tsan -j4 -R '^rt_cache_.*$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 serial, parallel, identical, different, and hierarchy cache
    cases with no TSan diagnostic and no suppression file.  The diagnostic
    first found and drove repairs for OpenNURBS calendar serialization, libbu
    heap/path lazy state, soltab prep publication, and directory instance
    locking before this clean gate was reached.

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray
    PASS: shared partition/Crofton sphere and all directed cases

  ctest --test-dir .build \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray|rt_crofton|rt_primitive_brep)$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 3/3

Legacy cleanup:

  * src/librt/primitives/bspline/bspline.cpp now unconditionally delegates
    prep/shot/normal/curve/UV/free to BREP.  The unreachable native solver,
    its obsolete structs, and its compile switch were removed.

  * rt_nurb_bbox still uses native Bezier decomposition, but now frees each
    temporary list directly instead of constructing the deleted ray-prep
    wrapper and an unnecessary copy of every original surface.

  cmake --build .build --target librt -j8
    PASS

Exact certified manifold-edge checkpoint:

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j6
  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 6/6 in 167.30 seconds.  The seam shard includes convex and
    reentrant transitions, direct contact, mixed regular/edge streams,
    periodic same-surface duplication, reversal, and the complete similarity
    matrix.  After strengthening the transformed contact-classifier assertion,
    the rebuilt seam shard passes independently in 24.93 seconds.
    After the final exact sector-boundary fallback ratchet, it passes again in
    45.84 seconds and the complete main process passes in 49.88 seconds.

  cmake --build .build-asan --target rt_brep_ray rt_cache -j6
  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 5 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_(crofton|seam|fold|affine)$)' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 5/5 in 628.08 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.
    The rebuilt seam shard with the final classifier assertion passes
    independently in 178.92 seconds with no diagnostic.  With the subsequent
    fail-closed exact-edge rule and sector-boundary ratchet it passes again in
    92.77 seconds without a diagnostic.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 4.72 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 14.55 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

  cmake --build .build-tsan --target librt rt_cache -j6
  env TSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:second_deadlock_stack=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-tsan --parallel 4 \
    -R '^rt_cache_.*$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 in 20.44 seconds with no ThreadSanitizer diagnostic after the
    final fail-closed exact-edge accounting and sector-boundary ratchet.

Tolerance-near contact-lobe checkpoint (Finding 69):

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j6
  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 in 132.22 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: the final post-hardening rerun passes 2/2 in 114.16 seconds
    (endpoint 7.69, seam 114.12) with no diagnostic.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 4 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_(crofton|fold|affine)$)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 4/4 in 318.88 seconds with no diagnostic.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 4.26 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 12.69 seconds with no diagnostic.

  cmake --build .build-tsan --target librt rt_cache -j6
  env TSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:second_deadlock_stack=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-tsan --parallel 4 \
    -R '^rt_cache_.*$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: the final rebuild and rerun passes 7/7 in 14.62 seconds with no
    ThreadSanitizer diagnostic.

Endpoint-moving topological closure checkpoint (Finding 70):

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j6
  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 in 194.90 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 2/2 in 196.92 seconds (endpoint 9.66, seam 196.67) with no
    diagnostic.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 4 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_(crofton|fold|affine)$)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 4/4 in 310.11 seconds with no diagnostic.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 4.62 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 14.00 seconds with no diagnostic.

  cmake --build .build-tsan --target librt rt_cache -j6
  env TSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:second_deadlock_stack=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-tsan --parallel 4 \
    -R '^rt_cache_.*$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: the final rebuild and rerun passes 7/7 in 16.00 seconds with no
    ThreadSanitizer diagnostic.

Bounded oblique contact checkpoint (Finding 71):

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 in 147.19 seconds.  The expanded seam shard passes in 96.07
    seconds and includes ten required oblique certifications, six required
    fail-closed threshold controls, six observational transition cases, and
    fourteen similarity/reparameterization/reversal certifications.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
      -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 2/2 in 451.32 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 4.15 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
      -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 13.13 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

Rootless oblique contact-corridor checkpoint (Finding 71):

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray -j8
  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 in 153.86 seconds.  The seam shard passes in 80.38 seconds
    with fourteen required oblique certifications, six required fail-closed
    threshold controls, two observational source-boundary fallbacks, and
    fourteen component-1e-3 similarity/reparameterization/reversal
    certifications.  The interval shard passes in 153.81 seconds, the complete
    process in 45.64 seconds, and Cauchy-Crofton in 56.00 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
      -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 2/2 in 392.94 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.
    After the final root-coverage gate was tightened to require a nonzero
    frame-cell count, the exact-revision standalone ASan/UBSan seam shard
    passes in 410.62 seconds with no diagnostic; the exact-revision optimized
    seam shard passes in 85.26 seconds.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 8.93 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
      -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 15.41 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

Connected source-root union checkpoint (Finding 72):

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 7 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 7/7 in 145.51 seconds.  The seam shard passes in 110.84 seconds
    with sixteen required oblique certifications, six required fail-closed
    controls, no observational cases, fourteen component-1e-3 and fourteen
    component-0.1 similarity/reparameterization/reversal cases, eight
    similarity-matrix source-union certificates, and six mutated negative
    controls.
    The interval shard passes in 145.46 seconds, the complete process in 44.68
    seconds, and Cauchy-Crofton in 57.36 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
      -R '^rt_brep_ray_(seam|endpoint)$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 2/2 in 527.51 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 6.28 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
      -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 13.71 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

Synthetic source-union theorem checkpoint (Finding 73):

  ctest --test-dir .build \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray_source_union$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 1/1 in 0.02 seconds.  Direct output reports five systems, one
    certification, four required rejections, and one invalid-provenance
    rejection.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 8 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 8/8 in 154.89 seconds (source union 0.02, fold 0.23, endpoint
    2.31, affine 5.06, complete directed process 46.52, Crofton 64.25,
    seam 119.61, interval 154.84).

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
      -R '^rt_brep_ray_(source_union|seam)$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 2/2 in 745.44 seconds (source union 0.15, seam 745.40) with
    no sanitizer diagnostic.  The run overlapped an optimized rebuild, so its
    seam time is not a performance baseline.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 4.68 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
      -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 23.25 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

Rational non-isoparametric frame checkpoint (Finding 74):

  ctest --test-dir .build \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray_nonisoparametric$' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 1/1.  Direct output reports four similarity cases, sixteen required
    oblique certifications, two identity source-union certificates, measured
    trim lift `0.05*T`, and complete two-lift discrepancy `1.00125*T`.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 9 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
    PASS: 9/9 in 146.36 seconds (source union 0.01, fold 0.29, endpoint
    2.32, affine 5.12, new non-isoparametric 27.31, complete directed process
    46.53, Crofton 57.33, interval 146.17, seam 146.31).

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
    PASS: 11/11 in 4.17 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
      -R '^(rt_brep_ray_nonisoparametric|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
    PASS: 12/12 in 132.13 seconds; the new curved-trim shard took 124.75
    seconds and no sanitizer reported a diagnostic.

Rational trim interval solver checkpoint (Finding 75):

  ctest --test-dir .build \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray_trim_interval$' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 1/1 in 0.01 seconds.  Direct output reports fourteen requests: six
  complete enclosures, six valid fail-closed results, and two invalid-input
  rejections.  The independently sampled rational quadratic contributes 65
  value/derivative comparisons per component.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 10 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 10/10 in 143.20 seconds (source union 0.01, trim interval 0.01,
  fold 0.28, endpoint 2.76, affine 4.69, non-isoparametric 32.44, complete
  directed process 50.14, Crofton 62.96, seam 139.13, interval 143.15).

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 6 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray_trim_interval|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 4.08 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 6 \
      -R '^(rt_brep_ray_trim_interval|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 12.96 seconds; the rational trim shard took 0.17 seconds and
  no sanitizer reported a diagnostic.

Contact-face trim miss checkpoint (Finding 76):

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --contact-trim-only
  PASS: four similarity cases, sixteen certifications, sixteen one-miss
  transactions, two identity source unions, and six threshold fallbacks.
  The unset-edge threshold control intentionally emits OpenNURBS invalid-edge
  diagnostics before proving fallback.

  ctest --test-dir .build \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray_seam$' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 1/1 in 168.34 seconds.  This independently restored the complete
  bowed-seam model-tolerance envelope after rejecting the initial broad
  declared-tolerance classifier.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 11 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 11/11 in 185.89 seconds (source union 0.01, trim interval 0.01,
  fold 0.31, endpoint 3.06, affine 5.32, non-isoparametric 27.00,
  contact trim 33.82, complete directed process 45.67, Crofton 61.05,
  interval 160.58, seam 185.84).

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 12 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray_contact_trim|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 32.93 seconds; the contact shard took 32.89 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 12 \
      -R '^(rt_brep_ray_contact_trim|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 162.11 seconds; the instrumented contact shard took 162.02
  seconds and no sanitizer reported a diagnostic.

Boundary-root contraction and rational tube checkpoint (Finding 77):

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only
  PASS: nine classified coefficient systems: six unique-root certificates and
  three fail-closed multi-root/singular/uncertain results.  Three affine and
  three nearby-quadratic boundary cases span equation scales `2^-100`, `1`,
  and `2^100`.  Invalid input and positive/negative tube-containment controls
  also pass.  Maximum synthetic radius is `9.09e-13` and expansion high-water
  is 2.

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --contact-trim-only
  PASS: 16/16 production root/tube certificates and 16/16 analytic support-
  boundary extensions, with one attempt per root, positive rational weights,
  neighbor exclusion, complete two-tube image containment, two identity source
  unions, sixteen admitted misses, and six unchanged threshold fallbacks.
  Maxima are radius/correction/contraction/image
  `9.13e-11/2.28e-11/2.54e-6/2.16e-5`; fixed-expansion high-water is 26.
  The unset-edge threshold control intentionally emits the existing OpenNURBS
  invalid-edge diagnostic before proving fallback.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 8 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 193.26 seconds on the final source, including the rounded-
  preconditioner determinant certificate (local root 0.01, trim interval 0.01,
  source union 0.01, fold 0.21, endpoint 3.05, affine 6.66,
  non-isoparametric 27.17, contact trim 34.78, complete directed process
  45.90, Crofton 57.34, interval 150.28, seam 193.21).

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 12 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray_local_root|rt_brep_ray_contact_trim|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
  PASS: 13/13 in 35.12 seconds; the contact shard took 35.08 seconds.

  Before the final preconditioner-determinant audit, the complete ASan/UBSan
  12-shard BREP matrix passed 12/12 in 987.62 seconds (interval 564.19 and seam
  843.30) with no sanitizer diagnostic.  The determinant guard only adds
  outward fixed-expansion products plus a fail-closed zero test.  Its
  instrumented path was then requalified with:

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 12 \
      -R '^(rt_brep_ray_local_root|rt_brep_ray_contact_trim|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure
  PASS: 13/13 in 174.57 seconds; the instrumented contact shard took 174.53
  seconds and no AddressSanitizer or UBSan diagnostic appeared.  The exact
  final source then made the radius cap and tube allowance one-ulp more
  conservative and replaced rounded reciprocal-factorial multiplication with
  successive outward divisions by exact small integers.  It requalified the
  directly affected shards with:

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
    ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 2 \
      -R '^(rt_brep_ray_local_root|rt_brep_ray_contact_trim)$' \
      --output-on-failure
  PASS: 2/2 in 179.93 seconds on the exact final source; local root took 0.15
  seconds and contact trim 179.89, with no sanitizer diagnostic.
  Leak scanning remains disabled because this host's ptrace wrapper makes
  LeakSanitizer terminate before reporting test results.

Difficult local-root corpus expansion (Finding 77):

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only
  PASS: thirteen classified arithmetic systems: ten unique-root certificates
  and three fail-closed multi-root/singular/uncertain results.  The new cases
  are an order-9-by-9 degree-elevated affine system, a coupled
  degree-15-by-7 boundary root, and nearly singular affine systems with
  determinant gaps `2^-20` and `2^-40`.  Every positive case certifies in one
  attempt.  Maximum radius is `9.09e-13` and expansion high-water is 3.

  PASS: three prepared rational bilinear surfaces certify complete model
  images: equal weights, a reversed-ray `2^20` weight ratio, and the same
  weighted face after `10,000x` scale plus large translation.  Root/model
  expansion high-water is 2/2 and maximum image displacement is `2.27e-9`.
  The optimized direct process completed with both PASS summaries.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 12 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 186.02 seconds on the final source.  The expanded local-root
  shard took 0.48 seconds, contact trim 42.07, complete directed process
  58.92, Crofton 68.57, interval 159.14, and seam 185.98 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only
  PASS with the same thirteen arithmetic and three prepared-surface cases;
  no AddressSanitizer diagnostic appeared.  Leak scanning remains disabled
  because this host's ptrace wrapper prevents LeakSanitizer qualification.

Near-grazing local-certificate bridge (Finding 78):

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --grazing-root-only
  PASS: ten resolved and six sub-tolerance directed root pairs certify; the
  two `0.01T` pairs are unavailable without a capability restart.  Both exact
  tangencies reject uniqueness, and all eighteen mirrored misses have no root
  or interval.  Minimum normalized separation is `5.92e-6`; maxima are
  radius/separation `0.00239`, contraction `0.0258`, model image `3.87e-7`,
  normal-dot error `3.47e-9`, one attempt, and expansion high-water 10.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 13 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 13/13 in 177.16 seconds.  The new grazing-root shard took 2.37
  seconds, local root 0.46, contact trim 44.19, directed 54.92, Crofton 70.76,
  interval 140.13, and seam 177.11 seconds.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --grazing-root-only
  PASS in 6.62 seconds with the same capability boundary and no sanitizer
  diagnostic.  Leak scanning remains disabled because of the host ptrace
  wrapper.

SurfaceTree prep fail-closed checkpoint (Finding 79):

  .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only
  PASS: thirteen arithmetic systems remain 10 certified/3 rejected.  The
  weighted surface corpus is now four cases: three complete root/model-image
  certificates and one required `2^400` weight-ratio prep rejection.  The
  process returns normally with `prep-rejected=1`; no local-root hook is called
  for the unavailable surface.

  cmake --build .build --target rt_brep_ray libged -j8
  PASS: libbrep, librt, the ray test, and both null-safe plotting callers build
  cleanly with the release warning-as-error configuration.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 13 \
    -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 13/13 in 174.44 seconds.  Local root took 0.51, grazing root 2.72,
  contact trim 34.86, directed 48.64, Crofton 59.42, interval 145.00, and seam
  174.39 seconds.

  ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 13 \
    -R '^(rt_brep_ray_local_root|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
    --output-on-failure
  PASS: 12/12 in 8.11 seconds, including serial/parallel prep-cache matrices,
  primitive conversion topology, and three established NURBS regressions.

  env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
    UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      ctest --test-dir .build-asan --parallel 13 \
        -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure
  PASS: 13/13 in 892.65 seconds; local root took 4.87, grazing root 19.12,
  contact trim 224.93, directed 337.52, Crofton 363.07, interval 635.94, and
  seam 892.51 seconds.  No sanitizer diagnostic appeared.  Leak scanning
  remains disabled because of the host ptrace wrapper.


STEP ray-prep observability and dense-tree census (Finding 80):

  `SurfaceTree` now retains the first deterministic construction failure as
  one of null surface, bounding box, midpoint normal evaluation, or unexpected
  subdivision, plus the failing recursion depth and UV domain.  Successful
  construction is unchanged.  The synthetic positive-weight `2^400` rational
  patch is now gated specifically as a normal-evaluation failure; its bbox is
  available, but OpenNURBS cannot supply the required midpoint normal.

  `brep-audit --prep-only file.g primitive` invokes actual BREP primitive prep
  and emits `brlcad-brep-ray-prep-audit-v1` JSON with time, peak RSS, face
  count, bbox, overall failure category, and per-face SurfaceTree failure
  cells.  `empty_brep` is separate from `surface_tree`.  The existing drawing
  audit did not call ray prep and could not observe this state.

  `brep-audit --surface-trees-only file.g primitive` serially profiles each
  face tree and emits `brlcad-brep-surface-tree-audit-v2` JSON with total and
  per-face time/leaves, source surface class and topology, domain, native
  NURBS dimensions, converted NURBS dimensions, and failure cell.  Building
  one face at a time bounds diagnostic retained memory and localizes a dense
  tree; it is not a production parallel-prep benchmark.

  Seven NIST databases all completed uncapped actual prep: 10 to 597 faces,
  about 0.88 to 7.39 seconds, and about 35 to 257 MiB peak RSS.  Thirty small
  non-GrabCAD primitives and thirty objects stratified across database sizes
  through 58 MiB also prepared without a SurfaceTree failure.

  An uncapped, two-process scan of the first BREP in all 135 recurta AP203
  databases completed in 239.57 seconds: 130 prepared, four exceeded a
  15-second classification cap, no process crashed, and the only normal
  failure was `10058.g`'s zero-face BREP.  The 130 successes cover 4,923
  faces.  The largest sub-cap model had 992 faces in 9.30 seconds; the slowest
  sub-cap model had 17 faces in 11.39 seconds.

  Uncapped replay classified all four time outliers as valid prep:

    * `10007.g`: 15 faces, 50.97 seconds, 77.8 MiB;
    * `10057.g`: 301 faces, 15.33 seconds, 859.7 MiB;
    * `10062.g`: 3,623 faces, 17.72 seconds, 270.9 MiB; and
    * `10088.g`: 5,771 faces, 17.38 seconds, 236.8 MiB.

  The low-face cases expose the tree algorithm rather than database scale.
  Serial `10007.g` profiling took 46.88 seconds.  Face 7 took 24.95 seconds
  for 12,722 leaves; faces 1, 3, and 5 took 6.56, 7.28, and 7.46 seconds.
  They are trimmed `ON_RevSurface` patches with rational order-3-by-3,
  9-by-9 NURBS forms.  Serial `10057.g` profiling took 85.99 seconds and
  412.2 MiB for 113,008 leaves.  Repeated revolved faces with rational
  order-3-by-2, 9-by-2 forms each cost about 2.4 to 2.6 seconds and 1,215
  leaves.  Production retained/overlapped parallel construction explains its
  larger 859.7 MiB peak.  The one-face revolved surface in `10145.g` creates
  8,192 leaves.

  A 1-GiB RLIMIT_AS pass with four external processes was deliberately
  discarded as a geometry census.  Each prep also requested twelve internal
  workers; the virtual-memory cap caused pthread creation failure,
  `std::bad_alloc`, and secondary termination even for models that later
  prepared normally uncapped.  This is useful bounded-resource hardening
  evidence, but it is not a solver or SurfaceTree-unavailability result.

  Direct verification on the final source:

    .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only

  PASS: thirteen arithmetic cases remain 10 certified/3 rejected, and the
  four weighted prepared-surface cases remain 3 certified/1 prep-rejected.
  The rejected surface is additionally checked for the exact non-none
  `FAILURE_NORMAL_EVALUATION` diagnostic.

    ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 13 \
      -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' --output-on-failure

  PASS: 13/13 in 192.67 seconds.  Local root took 2.57, grazing root
  5.98, contact trim 39.32, the complete process 53.54, Crofton 62.93,
  interval 165.31, and seam 192.24 seconds.

    ctest --test-dir .build --parallel 13 \
      -R '^(rt_brep_ray_local_root|rt_primitive_brep|rt_cache_.*|regress-nurbs_(NIST03_MISS_01|SPH_SOLID_HIT_LEN_01|BOX_PLATE_HIT_LEN_01))$' \
      --output-on-failure

  PASS: 12/12 in 9.25 seconds, including serial/parallel cache matrices,
  primitive BREP topology, and the three established NURBS regressions.

    env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
      UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --local-root-only

  PASS with the same arithmetic and prepared-surface counts and no sanitizer
  diagnostic.  Leak scanning remains disabled because the host ptrace wrapper
  prevents LeakSanitizer qualification.


Imported solid winding and overlap cleanup (Finding 81):

  This increment follows local commit `0ab3ea838f` (`Audit imported BREP ray
  depth and status-2 poles`).  It is not yet committed at the time this note
  is written.  Modified sources are:

    src/gtools/brep-audit.cpp
    src/librt/librt_private.h
    src/librt/primitives/brep/brep.cpp
    src/librt/tests/CMakeLists.txt
    src/librt/tests/brep_ray.cpp
    brep_raytrace_plan.txt
    brep_current_state.txt

  The first three additional stratified manifest objects passed 70-ray fresh
  depth-three/depth-eight partition and reversal comparison:

    non_grabcad/0353/0353-24-03.g Product_step46_item.s
      22 segments, one prepared selection, 16 surface-box overflows;
    non_grabcad/0353/0353-70-13.g Product_step18_item.s
      12 segments, 14 prepared selections; and
    non_grabcad/0353/0353-97-15.g Product_step46_item.s
      12 segments, 23 prepared selections, 16,440 surface-box overflows.

  All have zero depth or reversal differences.  The next object,
  `second/bearings/UCP-206.g`, `UCP_206_item.s`, exposed a real legacy solid
  assembly failure.  It is a valid, solid 127-face BREP with three face
  components.  Both requested tree depths returned the same raw roots, so the
  failure was not caused by insufficient SurfaceTree density.

  Exact deterministic witnesses:

    pair 3
      origin=(111.69115224698913, 7.5836018757108423,
              52.269242654264914)
      direction=(-0.94416363033127593, -0.21463855715332145,
                 -0.24997065616349057)
      chord=232.45171770344157

      The post-trim stream was ENTER, LEAVE, ENTER forward and LEAVE, ENTER,
      LEAVE in reverse.  Direction-dependent odd-tail removal selected
      different intervals.

    pair 0, the +X axis chord
      origin=(-123.77915341990379, 18.274326988514922,
              -9.2370555648813024e-14)
      direction=(1,0,0)
      chord=247.55830683980759

      Accepted directions were LEAVE, ENTER, ENTER, LEAVE, LEAVE, ENTER.
      Historical same-direction cleanup kept the last ENTER and first LEAVE,
      effectively intersecting overlapping shell ranges.  It published two
      segments with inverted endpoint normals.  Tightening `brep-audit` so a
      solid entry normal dot must be negative and an exit dot positive made
      this a hard failure instead of telemetry only.

    pair 26
      origin=(-109.55455871766632, -18.860350561763859,
              -44.046489176349951)
      direction=(0.97624929252184156, 0.17547275793085171,
                 0.12706939078607674)
      chord=238.1312905423778

      This distinguished true overlap from duplicate observations of one
      seam event.  Same-direction face-67/104 roots differ by about 2.4e-5,
      within the object's 5e-4 model tolerance.  Treating them as independent
      winding changes made the reverse ray lose its interval.

  A second concrete bug existed in both allocating and fixed cleanup loops.
  Each initialized an entering sign but attempted to replace it only under an
  iterator/index condition that was unreachable because iteration began at
  the second hit.  The direct fix and first-hit sign regression were useful,
  but raw-root tracing proved they were not the complete behavioral solution.

  New audit diagnostics in `brep-audit`:

    --ray-pair=N
      Select one indexed deterministic chord pair.  With `--ray-count=0`,
      pairs 0..2 are the three axis chords and later values select the same
      fixed-seed random chord stream used by the full audit.

    --legacy-only
      Build fresh requested-depth SurfaceTrees and run the legacy solve only,
      omitting expensive prepared local-box tracing.  This makes cleanup and
      depth questions separable without using a cache.

  Failure records now preserve selected pair index, trace mode, all raw roots
  and final intervals, intersected leaves, solver calls, cleanup-stage counts,
  overflow, face component, UV, normal dot, trim status/distance, hit class,
  direction and adjacent face.  Filtering maps failure records to the correct
  selected ray.  `_rt_brep_shot_legacy_trace` is exported internally so the
  detailed audit can retain telemetry while explicitly bypassing the prepared
  attempt.

  The final legacy solid rule has two separate operations:

    1. Same-event coalescence at model resolution.  Its ray-parameter envelope
       is max(BREP_SAME_POINT_TOLERANCE, tol.dist/|D|), widened by 128 epsilon
       at parameter scale.  Only consecutive same-direction observations are
       coalesced.  Keep the first ENTER and last LEAVE, which are the union
       extrema and map into each other under ray reversal.  Opposite
       directions are never coalesced because they can bound a real close
       grazing interval.

    2. Nonzero-winding material assembly.  Starting outside, retain the first
       ENTER changing winding 0->1 and the LEAVE changing 1->0.  Nested outward
       shells raise winding and therefore produce a union envelope.  Disjoint
       shells return to zero and produce separate intervals.  Inward-oriented
       cavities produce the expected temporary zero winding.  Finding 84
       supersedes the original asymmetric prefix/suffix handling: a reverse
       scan removes only entries without a later exit and a forward scan
       removes only exits without an earlier retained entry.  The maximal
       balanced stream is therefore retained under reversal without bridging
       a gap.  A sole unmatched observation is retained for the later
       certified seam/closure resolver; dropping it broke all intended Cobb
       crack repairs and was caught before promotion.

  `brep_hit_workspace` compacts in place with no allocation.  The allocating
  list performs exactly the same choices for equivalence testing.  Plate and
  non-solid paths keep their previous first-hit convention.  The prepared
  pipeline remains stricter: it publishes only a complete owned event ledger
  and falls back atomically on unresolved winding/event identity.  General
  prepared winding above one still needs explicit independently owned shell
  events; the legacy parameter-local policy is not used as a proof.

  `_rt_brep_direction_cleanup_test` now accepts a model-distance tolerance and
  covers:

    * nested ENTER/ENTER/ENTER/LEAVE/LEAVE/LEAVE union envelopes;
    * reversal of the complete envelope;
    * odd ENTER/LEAVE/ENTER and reversed LEAVE/ENTER/LEAVE streams;
    * leading/trailing unmatched events bracketing nested material;
    * same-direction tolerance clusters with reversal; and
    * a coalesced singleton retained as a seam-closure witness.

  The independent analytic fixture constructs radius-five implicit spheres at
  x=-3 and x=+3, converts each to BREP, and appends the two closed shells into
  one BREP primitive.  The oracle remains the implicit CSG union.  Its x-axis
  interval is [12,28].  Before the fix the BREP returned the intersection
  [18,22] in both directions; after the fix both directions return [12,28].
  The existing disjoint-sphere union continues to return distinct intervals.
  This isolates solid assembly from STEP, trim, tree density, and BREP Boolean
  conversion.

  An intermediate version that discarded every unmatched leading/trailing
  event passed UCP but failed the seam gate.  Cobb classifier cases lost their
  singleton closure candidate, all 14 below-envelope production repairs
  disappeared, and two prepared promotions became regressions.  Retaining a
  single witness restored:

    * Cobb classifier similarity/parameter invariance;
    * ambiguous trim-correspondence fallback;
    * 14/14 below-envelope repairs with zero crack leaks;
    * two prepared promotions and zero regressions;
    * 322/322 prepared selections in the bowed matrix; and
    * the complete 416-ray bowed seam matrix.

  Final optimized validation on the exact source:

    .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --seam-only

  PASS in about 383 seconds.  All seam, closure, overlap, similarity, defect,
  prepared-promotion, and isolated trim/edge checks pass.

    ctest --test-dir .build -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' \
      -E '^rt_brep_ray_seam$' -j14 --output-on-failure

  PASS: 17/17 in 156.82 seconds.  Together with the standalone seam result,
  the complete registered 18-shard gate passes.  Cleanup and hard Crofton pass
  independently; the new combined-overlapping-sphere fixture reports two
  directed cases and zero failures.

    .build/bin/brep-audit --ray-depth-compare --ray-count=32 \
      /home/cyapp/step_corpus_g/second/bearings/UCP-206.g UCP_206_item.s

  PASS: 70 rays, 16 hit rays, 20 segments, zero invalid rays, orientation
  anomalies, depth differences, or reversal mismatches.  Maximum depth-three
  versus depth-eight endpoint difference is 7.19e-10.  Eight rays select
  prepared production, six fall back for box capacity and 56 as uncertified.

  UCP performance/capacity baseline:

    depth 3: 7,620 nodes, 5,139 leaves, about 1.02 seconds wall prep;
    depth 8: 170,816 nodes, 84,360 leaves, about 16.92 seconds wall prep;
    prepared trace: 821,770 subdivisions, 105,414 isolated boxes,
      104,323 fold attempts, 103,100 surface-box overflow attempts;
    peak optimized audit RSS: about 244 MB.

  Final ASAN+UBSAN validation, with leak scanning disabled because of the host
  ptrace wrapper:

    env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
      UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --cleanup-only

    env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
      UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      .build-asan/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --crofton-hard-only

    env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
      UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      .build-asan/bin/brep-audit --ray-depth-compare --ray-count=0 \
        --ray-pair=N --legacy-only \
        /home/cyapp/step_corpus_g/second/bearings/UCP-206.g UCP_206_item.s

  PASS for cleanup, hard analytic/Crofton, and N=0,3,26 with no sanitizer
  diagnostic.  The three imported processes were intentionally parallel and
  each peaked near 1.13 GB RSS under instrumentation.

  Performance direction remains correctness first, optimization second.  The
  UCP trace now supplies a concrete workload for the later Abert-informed
  phase: eliminate flat/global face-span work, reduce dense seed trees, compact
  immutable data, vectorize conservative projection/rejection, implement a
  real batched vshot, and profile the corrector before changing it.  Do not
  optimize away the exact partition, crack, reversal, Crofton, or grazing
  gates established here.


Trim endpoint classification and NIST depth discrepancy (Finding 82):

  The next broader imported checks produced these legacy-only 70-ray results:

    non_grabcad/recurta/step_ap203/10077.g id2_item.s
      PASS, 5,458/138,371 depth-three/eight nodes, 22 segments;
    nist/NIST_MBE_PMI_1.g Document_item.s
      PASS, 1,763/53,051 nodes, 20 segments;
    second/case_fan_120mm.g case_fan_120mm_v3_item.s
      PASS, 682 faces, 31,388/744,484 nodes, 24 segments; and
    non_grabcad/a.g A_item.s
      correctly reported non-solid for its 471 faces.

  `nist/NIST_MBE_PMI_11.g`, `Document_item.s`, then exposed a real
  density-dependent result.  Exact deterministic pair 1 is:

    origin=(-7.1054273576010019e-15, -58.828516522601504,
            -0.075000000000000622)
    direction=(0, 0.99999999999999989, 0)
    chord=117.65703304520302

  Before repair, adaptive depths zero through seven returned only interval
  `[74.828516522601504,90.328516522601504]`; depth eight also returned
  `[27.328516522601504,42.828516522601504]`.  Both depths were reversal
  stable.  All depths found the same surface root on face 7 at
  `t=27.328516522601504`, UV approximately
  `(4.71238898038469,1.695)`, normal dot `-1`.  The difference was trim
  classification, not root convergence.

  At depths zero through seven the leaf and full face CurveTree called this a
  clean miss.  At depth eight the leaf had
  `m_checkTrim=false,m_trimmed=false`, accepted the root without evaluating
  the point, and disagreed with the full CurveTree.  The dense tree was
  accidentally masking a classifier defect.  This is direct evidence that
  depth eight is a reference for detecting change, not ground truth.

  Face topology establishes the intended answer.  Face 7 is a cylindrical
  patch with outer loop 9 covering approximately
  `u=[pi,2*pi],v=[0.27,1.77]`; the root is plainly inside.  The upper boundary
  is split between trims 39 and 40.  Trim 39 ends about `2.2e-8` in u beyond
  the query, while trim 40 begins roughly `1.6e-4` on the other side.  The
  two intervals are also the physically symmetric cross section of the
  annular model.

  The defect was a tolerance inconsistency inside the CurveTree classifier.
  `CurveTree::isTrimmed` selected candidates with the structural
  `BREP_UV_DIST_FUZZ` envelope (`1e-6`), but `BRNode::isTrimmed` repeated the u
  bounding-box test exactly.  The correct upper trim was counted as a
  candidate and then rejected before curve evaluation, leaving only lower
  crossings and the wrong winding.  `BRNode::isTrimmed` now uses the same UV
  envelope and clamps the admitted u coordinate to the leaf endpoint before
  curve evaluation.  This does not expand `BREP_EDGE_MISS_TOLERANCE`,
  model-distance closure, or hit-event coalescence, and a query beyond the UV
  envelope is still outside.

  `brep-audit` failure records now include fixed cleanup stage counts and
  per-root leaf/full-face trim status, distance, candidate count, hit class,
  and aggregate equivalence counters.  These fields made the accidental
  depth-eight shortcut visible without changing production behavior.

  A new source-only fixture, available as
  `rt_brep_ray --trim-classifier-only`, constructs a planar outer loop with a
  split upper trim reproducing the endpoint discrepancy.  It requires a
  query inside the `BREP_UV_DIST_FUZZ` envelope to be classified inside with
  the expected crossing distance, and a query beyond that envelope to remain
  outside.  It is registered as `rt_brep_ray_trim_classifier`, following the
  rule that difficult imported failures are reduced into the C/C++ corpus.

  Validation on the exact source:

    .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --trim-classifier-only

  PASS.  Exact NIST pair 1 passes for every candidate depth zero through
  seven against depth eight, with four hits, two intervals, zero classifier
  equivalence differences, and reversal equality.  The complete audit:

    .build/bin/brep-audit --ray-depth-compare --ray-count=32 \
      /home/cyapp/step_corpus_g/nist/NIST_MBE_PMI_11.g Document_item.s

  PASS: 70 rays, 10 hit rays, 14 segments, zero invalid rays, orientation
  anomalies, depth differences, or reversal mismatches; maximum endpoint
  delta `1.42e-14`; 44 prepared selections at both depths.  Depth three uses
  2,146 nodes/1,556 leaves and depth eight 62,790/31,932.

  Final optimized validation on the exact clamped source is 19/19 registered
  ray shards.  The new classifier plus complete seam/crack matrix passed 2/2
  in 234.82 seconds; all other 17 shards passed concurrently in 175.53
  seconds.  Rebuilt ASAN/UBSAN runs of the classifier fixture and exact NIST
  depth-three/depth-eight pair pass without a diagnostic.  Leak scanning
  remains disabled for the established host ptrace limitation.

  This repair removes an accidental dependency on the densest tree, but does
  not justify lowering the production depth yet.  Complete the remaining
  imported strata and analytic/seam/grazing gates first.  Once correct answers
  and fallback authority are stable, the planned Abert-informed performance
  phase remains an explicit deliverable: profile normal production, then
  optimize broadly applicable face/span traversal, immutable data layout,
  conservative vectorized rejection, batched vshot, and the corrector if it
  is measurably hot.  Matching Abert exactly is not a requirement.


Loop-topology trim classifier and exact join ownership (Finding 83):

  The first per-loop parity implementation exposed and repaired four
  independent correctness defects that the historical closest-trim direction
  rule could not represent.

  1. Outer and inner loops are now classified separately.  A point is in
     material when it is in at least one declared outer loop and no declared
     inner loop.  Imported curve orientation is not used to infer hole
     topology.  Unknown loops retain a parity compatibility path.

  2. The parity ray follows a nonperiodic parameter direction when possible:
     +U when V is closed, otherwise +V.  Queries are normalized into closed
     surface domains.  CurveTree prep constructs per-loop periodic leaf images
     only in the transverse coordinate, sorted for both U and V scans.  It
     does not replicate infinitely along the parity ray.  The derived index is
     rebuilt after normal construction and cache deserialization, so the
     serialized format and pointer ownership do not change.

  3. `BRNode::crossesAbove` and `crossesRight` implement exact half-open
     endpoint ownership.  A separate fixed-workspace curve-distance estimate
     supplies proximity and adjacency.  Classification no longer chooses
     material from the orientation of the nearest curve above the query.

  4. The 0.005 UV endpoint allowance is authorized only at a real topological
     join displacement.  Prep compares each ordered trim endpoint with its
     neighbor, reducing coordinate differences modulo a closed surface
     period.  Only the incident leaf whose lower fixed-coordinate endpoint is
     displaced toward the gap may extend, and only by the caller's existing
     tolerance.  Exact joins retain one half-open owner and receive no crack
     extension.

  The fourth rule was required by exact UCP pair 3.  Its unmatched face-8
  event occurred at UV
  `(0.49347747834767419,0.37960829068592117)`.  Production originally called
  it inside with trim distance 0.0155288.  An independent sampled outer loop
  converged from 16 through 4,096 samples per trim to outside, with minimum
  boundary distance 0.0157269, safely beyond the crack envelope.  Exact trim
  44 already supplied a crossing; trim 45 joined it to about 8e-17 but the
  blind endpoint allowance added a duplicate third crossing.  Join-gated
  extension removes that event.  Exact UCP pair 3 then has one interval in
  both directions with zero depth delta.

  The genuine NIST crack remains repaired.  Face 7 at UV approximately
  `(4.71238898038469,1.695)` agrees with the sampled oracle, returns inside at
  depths three and eight, and restores both material intervals.  Its ordered
  upper trims have an actual roughly 1.6e-4 coordinate displacement, so prep
  grants the bounded endpoint extension.  The source classifier shard now
  contains a displaced join, an explicitly typed same-orientation inner hole,
  and an exact triangle join whose false extension would change an outside
  query from two crossings to three.  All pass:

    .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --trim-classifier-only

  `brep-audit --trim-query face,u,v` is now a high-resolution independent
  diagnostic.  It samples each ordered loop at 16, 64, 256, 1,024, and 4,096
  segments per trim and records loop type, raw/curve/cover endpoints, join and
  closing gaps, lifted bounding boxes, query image, signed area, horizontal
  and vertical crossings, and boundary distance.  It also reports the
  production parity-ray direction, exact half-open BRNode crossings,
  candidates, prepared leaf images, and closest adjacent face.

  The polygon result is an oracle only when the three densest levels agree and
  every lifted loop closes within BREP_EDGE_MISS_TOLERANCE.  UCP face 103 loop
  119 closes two U periods away in the selected cover
  (`cover_closing_gap=188.495559...`).  Its planar polygon answer changes with
  lift, while quotient-space production correctly accepts the full periodic
  band.  Such output is marked `oracle_applicable=false`; per-level invalid
  matches and `final_matches_production` are null.  It is not a production
  mismatch.  Doubly periodic surfaces still require a separately qualified
  torus-domain classifier before this rule is generalized.

  SurfaceTree trim prep now uses a CurveTree cell certificate rather than
  retaining a copied list of trim pointers in every BBNode.  A cell stays
  pointwise when a trim box is geometrically near or an actually displaced
  tolerance endpoint can change parity over its fixed-coordinate range.
  Exact endpoints far along the ray axis do not force subdivision because
  their incident crossings change parity by an even count.  Ray-time point
  classification scans immutable prepared vectors without allocation.

  This is already a material acceleration-structure reduction at the same
  requested depth.  The final FRAME 70-ray audit passes with no depth, face,
  orientation, or reversal difference and maximum endpoint delta
  `1.5781040474394104e-8`.  Its depth-three/eight trees are now
  32,661/818,332 nodes and 20,052/412,008 leaves.  The preceding conservative
  endpoint-column build used 66,998/2,574,043 nodes and 44,223/1,297,795
  leaves.  NIST passes all 70 rays with maximum endpoint delta 1.42e-14 and
  retains 2,146/62,794 nodes and 1,556/31,936 leaves.

  The final single-process UCP 70-ray audit passes with zero depth, face,
  orientation, invalid-ray, or reversal differences and maximum endpoint
  delta `7.1902661602507578e-10`.  The refined classifier builds
  7,587/254,910 nodes and 5,146/131,064 leaves at requested depths three/eight;
  measured wall prep was 0.98/26.07 seconds on this host.  This trim-heavy
  object has 122,835 CurveTree leaves, so profile normal production separately
  from trace mode before drawing performance conclusions.

  A separate UCP pair-43 failure was not a trim error.  Near-hit cleanup
  erased any same-direction NEAR_HIT adjacent to a clean event, even when the
  two ray parameters were several units apart.  Both allocating and fixed
  cleanup now require `brep_solid_events_coincident` at the model-derived
  parameter tolerance before removing or merging them.  Exact pairs 0, 1,
  3, and 43 all pass depth-three/eight and reversal checks; pair 43's maximum
  endpoint delta is `9.9475983006414026e-13`.

  Production root classification retains measured join-gap healing.  The
  optional raw half-open result is exposed only to audit diagnostics.  This is
  intentional: production must represent the solid modeling intent across a
  sub-tolerance displaced seam, while the audit needs an unhealed view of the
  numerical boundary.  Healing remains bounded by the existing tolerance and
  a prep-certified displacement; it does not restore the former blind endpoint
  extension.

  Two valid root correctors can land on opposite sides of an exact trim by a
  few ulps.  When both roots are independently near the trim and agree in ray
  parameter, face/span, direction, and adjacency, NEAR_HIT versus NEAR_MISS is
  now recorded as a `near-side-equivalent` raw classification difference, not
  a semantic physical-event difference.  Solid authority remains with the
  subsequent seam/edge transaction.  The final Cobb matrix contains two such
  equivalences and zero semantic root-event mismatches.

  A separate `REGULAR_NEAR_TRIM` event certificate repairs the isolated
  displaced-trim transition.  It is available only after a manifold-edge
  transaction has selected the boundary component and the bounded complement
  search certifies a disjoint regular component.  Publication additionally
  requires an inside NEAR_HIT from the local-root source, at least one source
  box, and no independent edge or vertex ownership.  All six similarity and
  reversal witnesses contain exactly one manifold-edge and one regular-near-
  trim event; maximum normalized error is 6.22e-9.

  The non-isoparametric fixture showed that a roughly 1.25e-6 difference from
  the analytic sphere is real geometry, not a missed polish: its deliberately
  bowed NURBS surface has a transverse solve residual of only 2.31e-13.  The
  certified interval and resolved seam transaction are the oracle on that
  altered surface; the sphere remains a tight representative-drift ratchet.
  Opposite-face and contact-face fixtures each pass all 16 transform/reversal
  cases.

  The oblique grazing trend passes 16/16 configurations inside the certified
  conditioning envelope as clearance converges toward point contact.  Six
  deliberately almost-parallel ray/edge cases remain outside the theorem and
  all fail closed without publishing a speculative hit.  This establishes the
  desired behavioral trend: stable contact resolution while the bounds are
  decisive, then an explicit fallback rather than a silent hit loss.

  Final optimized seam validation:

    .build/src/librt/tests/rt_brep_ray --seam-only

  PASS.  The 416-ray bowed matrix has zero below-envelope leaks, 14/14 legacy
  crack repairs, zero reversal inconsistencies, 280 certified production
  selections, 136 uncertified fallbacks, and 24 validated seam pairs.  Two
  failed ownership attempts are accounted box failures and publish nothing.
  Eight contact pairs have two source boxes and roots each and one allowable
  raw half-open miss-side root each.  The experimental local cleanup had two
  ambiguous comparisons only when both gap and clearance exceeded the model
  tolerance by 10%; no ambiguity occurred inside tolerance and no comparison
  was an oracle regression.  Finding 84's event-local near-miss cleanup
  removes both remaining ambiguities without changing the selection,
  fallback, or seam-pair populations.  A 280-selection floor preserves the
  conservative fallback increase as an explicit performance/certification
  ratchet.

    ctest --test-dir .build -R '^rt_brep_ray($|_)' \
      -E '^rt_brep_ray_seam$' -j14 --output-on-failure

  PASS: 18/18 in 139.15 seconds.  The exact NIST pair 1 and UCP pairs 0, 1, 3,
  and 43 pass depth-three/eight partition and reversal comparison.  All seven
  optimized serial/parallel cache tests pass after removal of per-BBNode trim
  pointer lists and legacy CurveTree leaf-key serialization.

  Final ASAN+UBSAN validation on rebuilt binaries, with leak scanning disabled
  for the established host ptrace limitation:

    env ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0:halt_on_error=1 \
      UBSAN_OPTIONS=halt_on_error=1:print_stacktrace=1 \
      ctest --test-dir .build-asan \
        -R '^(rt_brep_ray_(trim_classifier|defect|nonisoparametric|contact_trim|cleanup)|rt_cache_.*)$' \
        -j4 --output-on-failure

  PASS: 12/12 in 202.82 seconds with no sanitizer diagnostic.

  Correctness remains ahead of optimization, but the next performance work is
  now concrete.  Recover the 42 selections lost to conservative certification
  only with general proofs; profile normal production separately from trace;
  then pursue the Abert-informed object/face/span BVH, compact immutable data,
  conservative SIMD rejection, batched vshot, and corrector/evaluation work if
  measured hot.  Preserve directed implicit-to-BREP partitions, paired
  Cauchy-Crofton area/volume convergence, grazing ladders, crack perturbations,
  similarity/reversal tests, and the difficult-root C/C++ corpus as hard gates.

  Imported agreement remains evidence of invariant behavior, not a geometric
  oracle.  The stronger truth program is unchanged: analytic implicit-to-BREP
  directed partitions, paired implicit/BREP Cauchy-Crofton area and volume,
  signed grazing ladders converging toward point tangency, Cobb seam/crack
  perturbations, scale/translation/rotation invariance, and later CSG-tree
  substitution in both directions.  Keep the production depth at eight while
  completing those gates.  The topology-aware cell theorem can be optimized;
  it must not be replaced by unrestricted endpoint fuzz or closest-trim
  orientation.


Local near-miss resolution and reversal-invariant balanced runs (Finding 84):

  The 848-face `IBEX_SOLID_item.s` in
  `original/SC_solid_stp_20260429.g` completed the sampled ray comparison for
  the largest model in the initial 14-database preparation stratum.  Its
  deterministic pair 22 has origin

    (95.848591855513888, -55.740815264982629,
     -11.3876265194396)

  direction

    (-0.58941604087522914, 0.74193704918254422,
     0.31955929936283961)

  and chord `255.39858798473995`.  Fresh adaptive-depth-three and depth-eight
  trees found the same nine roots.  Before repair the forward legacy path
  returned no intervals and the reversed path returned two.  Prepared tracing
  also failed closed with six unresolved events, so it did not conceal or
  supply the fallback answer.

  Raw cleanup telemetry isolated two direction-sensitive policies.  First,
  NEAR_MISS cleanup used sorted adjacency and matching normal direction as if
  they proved one physical event.  Forward cleanup let a leaving near miss at
  about 71.715 interact with a clean entry at about 75.263 despite their
  several-unit separation.  Reversal changed ordering and retained a
  different stream.  Near-miss versus non-miss removal, consecutive near-miss
  merging, and near-miss versus clean/near-hit relabeling now all require
  `brep_solid_events_coincident` using the established model-derived parameter
  envelope.  The fixed and allocating paths implement the same locality rule.

  Second, the old solid winding code ignored leading unmatched exits but
  deleted the whole suffix after an unmatched trailing entry.  A stream
  equivalent to ENTER, ENTER, ENTER, LEAVE, LEAVE consequently lost its
  balanced interior in one direction while the reversed form retained it.
  Cleanup now reverse-scans to remove only entries with no later exit, then
  forward-scans to remove only exits with no earlier retained entry.  This is
  allocation-free parenthesis matching.  The surviving stream is compacted
  to the same nonzero-winding union intervals as before.  A lone original
  observation remains available to the certified crack/closure repair.

  A new source test helper accepts complete synthetic hit-class streams.
  `--cleanup-only` ratchets both ENTER/ENTER/ENTER/LEAVE/LEAVE and the reduced
  SC stream, including a locally coincident near-hit/near-miss pair and a
  distant adjacent near-miss/clean pair.  Each test supplies the exact
  reversed stream and compares the full retained partition under
  `t_reverse = chord - t_forward`.  It is deliberately C++ data rather than a
  model-specific `.g` fixture and joins the difficult-case corpus required to
  prevent fixed-this/broke-that solver work.

  Exact pair 22 now returns two intervals in both directions and at both
  depths:

    [58.107629653..., 71.715107548...]
    [93.746252051..., 184.158146005...]

  The complete 70-ray legacy-only SC comparison passes with 16 hit rays, 54
  misses, 26 segments, zero invalid/orientation/depth/reversal differences,
  and maximum depth delta `3.3064736726373667e-8`.  The final depth-three tree
  has 270,839 nodes and 172,669 leaves; depth eight has 3,494,794 nodes and
  1,787,007 leaves; both use 60,527 CurveTree leaves.  Peak resident memory was
  about 973 MB.

  The full prepared-plus-legacy 70-ray trace also passes.  Both requested
  depths report 35 eligible/attempted rays, zero selections, 31 uncertified
  fallbacks, two surface-box overflows, and two event-class fallbacks.  Each
  reports 2,498 candidate spans, 18,336 subdivision boxes, 1,235 isolated
  boxes, 213 fold attempts, eight fold certificates, 18 surface-box
  overflows, 35 physically complete ledgers, and 225 unresolved physical
  events.  Wall time was 7m43.79s, CPU time 559.33s, and peak RSS 950,184 KB
  on this host.  This is trace instrumentation, not a controlled normal-shot
  benchmark, but it makes the general optimization target clear: reduce
  object/face/span candidate traversal and proof work before assuming Newton
  iteration is the primary cost.

  Optimized validation after the repair is 18/18 non-seam ray shards in
  150.68 seconds plus a complete passing seam shard.  The seam matrix retains
  280 selections, 136 uncertified fallbacks, 24 seam pairs, zero leaks, and
  14/14 known crack repairs.  Its formerly two out-of-tolerance experimental
  local ambiguities are now zero because distant sorted events cannot modify
  one another.  Rebuilt ASAN/UBSAN `--cleanup-only` passes with no diagnostic;
  the exact high-memory SC replay was qualified in the optimized build rather
  than multiplied under ASAN.

  This repair improves the tolerant legacy fallback; it is not prepared
  authority.  The prepared ledger still fails the whole ray on incomplete
  ownership, unresolved event identity, unsupported trim/seam topology, or
  nonzero final winding.  Parameter coincidence prevents a known local crack
  observation from corrupting an otherwise usable fallback but does not prove
  arbitrary roots equivalent.

  Correctness remains the immediate priority.  Production adaptive depth
  stays eight while analytic implicit-to-BREP partitions, paired
  Cauchy-Crofton area/volume convergence, signed grazing ladders, Cobb crack
  perturbations, similarity/reversal invariance, feature-targeted imported
  rays, and later CSG-tree substitutions expand.  Once these answers and
  fallback boundaries are stable, the performance phase should profile normal
  production, prioritize a compact object/face/span BVH and conservative
  batched rejection, implement a real `vshot`, and optimize OpenNURBS
  evaluation/Newton correction only when measured hot.  The goal is a broadly
  applicable certified pipeline, not exact reproduction of Abert et al.


NEXT ACTIONS
------------

Current priority after the local-cleanup/initial-stratum checkpoint:

A. Keep the production adaptive depth at eight.  The first reproducible
   14-database depth-three/eight prep stratum, the imported comparisons, the
   status-2 pole repair, UCP winding/overlap repair, NIST trim-endpoint repair,
   and SC local-cleanup repair are recorded above.  The selected objects in
   that initial stratum now have sampled ray comparisons.  Expand into new
   strata with `--ray-depth-compare`, using `--ray-pair` and `--legacy-only`
   to ratchet every failure before paying for a full trace.  Retain complete
   partition/reversal results, orientation, prepared selection and fallback
   populations,
   face/span/status-2/trim/scale fields, actual requested-depth prep
   statistics, RSS, and cache behavior.  Add feature-targeted rays so a high
   miss fraction does not masquerade as coverage.  Successful tree builds and
   agreement with depth eight do not by themselves establish an
   arbitrary-BREP default.
B. Preserve adaptive depth three as the present conservative experimental
   plateau.  Do not spend correctness effort forcing special fixtures to
   depth zero.  Any candidate production reduction must retain the complete
   19-shard optimized ray gate, the seven rebuilt-cache cases, sanitizer
   qualification, and exact identical-line partition results.
C. Use the deterministic hard replay as the seed of the difficult-solver C/C++
   corpus.  The status-2 analytic-revolution sphere pole is ratcheted under
   scale, translation, rotation, and reversal.  The UCP solid-assembly failure
   is ratcheted by pure hit streams, an appended-overlapping-sphere CSG-union
   oracle, exact imported pairs 0/3/26, and the complete 70-ray audit.  The
   NIST depth discrepancy is ratcheted by a split-trim endpoint fixture and
   exact pair 1 at every adaptive depth.  SC pair 22 is ratcheted by a pure
   hit-class stream that distinguishes coincident and merely adjacent events,
   plus exact imported and complete 70-ray replay.  Add every subsequent
   imported discrepancy with its complete geometry, ray, tolerance, span,
   box, root, event, and fallback evidence; do not tune against an unnamed
   `.g` model or replace one failure with another.
D. Extend prepared authority only with separate complete proofs for the
   remaining categories: mixed fold/regular streams, trim-near and
   topology-boundary events, contact-only rays, curved vertex links, and
   many-to-many edge clusters.  Preserve tolerance-healed seam behavior and
   the whole-ray fallback; never reinterpret unresolved as miss.
E. Once the density/default and cache decision is qualified, begin the plan's
   certified-pipeline performance phase.  Measure normal production separately
   from trace mode, because trace deliberately reruns the legacy path after a
   prepared selection.  Profile phase costs first, then prioritize the
   object-level face/span BVH, compact immutable span/trim arrays,
   conservative SIMD coefficient work, and a real batched vshot.  Optimize
   Newton/OpenNURBS evaluation only if profiles identify it as hot.

The numbered items below remain the detailed longer-term backlog.  The
current ordering above supersedes their older references to dense-tree
prerequisites that the new structural-depth measurements have now resolved.

1. Preserve the new local-root certificate as narrow declared-contact
   authority while continuing to expand its difficult-system corpus.  The
   analytic ratchet now covers singular, multiple-root, high-order,
   determinant-`2^-40`, `2^20` rational-weight-range, similarity, and reversal
   cases.  The generic converted-sphere bridge now adds real near-tangent
   rational coefficients through `0.1T`, exact-double-root rejection, and
   mirrored misses.  The first uncapped STEP subset found no numerical
   SurfaceTree failure, so do not fabricate one from resource-cap termination.
   Promote the revolved order-3-by-3 and order-3-by-2 outliers through their
   analytic torus/cone/cylinder equivalents, add their convex and concave
   grazing trends, and keep the audit ready to capture the first genuine
   unavailable face.  Prove complete parent coverage/candidate accounting
   before considering the theorem for ordinary seams, vertices, or general
   grazing dispatch.
   Profile the fixed-expansion Taylor cost separately from
   continuation and material-sector work.  Keep arbitrary root counts, exact
   tangency, vertex neighborhoods, inferred tolerance authority, and every
   nonunique, non-positive-weight, or numerically singular surface fail-closed.
2. Extend vertex classification only through a separately certified curved
   differential-link theorem.  Bound surface-normal and tangent variation over
   a local neighborhood before replacing the planar cyclic link.  Define exact
   face-tangent contact and tolerance-near intended vertex closure as separate
   policies; do not broaden the exact line witness or let model tolerance
   authorize topology by itself.
3. Revisit inferred tolerance policy without allowing a sampled or computed
   gap to authorize itself.  Keep model-space, UV, numerical-root, t-cluster,
   and minimum-segment tolerances distinct, and add explicit overlap/contact
   threshold cases around the new strict/ambiguous decision boundary.
4. Profile the strict ordinary- and fold-root production selectors on
   stratified analytic and STEP cases.  Separate prepared-attempt cost,
   selected ordinary rays, selected clean-interior fold pairs, uncertified
   grazing fallback, near-trim rejection, and every unsupported/capacity
   reason.  The mapped tangent/grazing ratchet now eliminates all six former
   condition-100 and condition-1,000 resolved misses.  Its fixed-work
   candidate, Bernstein determinant, synthetic corridor, fused real
   coefficient, per-coefficient restriction, root localization, cross-span
   identity, and minimum-segment paths are permanent gates.  Binary64
   Krawczyk still certifies none of the twelve hard roots; the portable
   fixed-size expansion tier plus bounded Krawczyk contraction certifies eight
   with floors 2/2/2/2/0/0, while regular-graph endpoint signs prove existence
   for all twelve and complete-parent counts remain 2/2/2/2/2/2.  Extend the
   physical event resolver beyond the initial same-face, one-boundary,
   clean-interior pair only after corner/many-to-many topology and near-trim
   seam interactions receive independent qualification.  Analyze anisotropic
   seam tolerances without weakening the current fold gate.  Keep exact or
   bounded alternative frame construction as a later conditioning
   improvement, not as a blocker for these roots.
   Separate old-solver root absence from prepared
   box explosion and local-corrector failure.  Find a lower-cost dispatch or
   fallback strategy
   before reducing tree density: the first correctness-only promotion passes
   every qualified partition oracle but increases the grazing-heavy ray corpus
   from 24.07 to about 69 seconds.  Do not lower density until every fallback
   population remains correct without relying on a tree that is no longer
   dense enough.
5. Build from the committed nested multi-interval, transformed, reused BREP-
   leaf hierarchy into tolerance-scaled thin walls and larger noncoincident
   production-style trees.  Keep evaluated ON_Boolean solids and reverse NIST
   BREP-to-CSG recognition as later, separately classified qualification tiers.
6. Use the new isolated trim-only and edge-only zero-selection baseline to
   prove complete duplicate-terminal-box/root ownership, interval orientation,
   and trim/edge-tube containment before publication.  Then extend the Cobb
   corpus to vertex-neighborhood, G1, tangent, combined-error, and arbitrary
   endpoint-overlap graphs, and remove the remaining duplicated Cobb control
   net from brep_invalid.cpp while
   independently gating its invalid topology behavior.
7. Use the registered directed, Crofton, seam, interval, fold, and affine
   CTest processes with `ctest -j`; retain the no-argument full executable for
   compatibility qualification.  Keep pure arithmetic counters deterministic
   and do not introduce shared-process parallelism into OpenNURBS/model
   construction until separately qualified.  The exhaustive interval matrix
   is the remaining sanitizer critical path, but subdividing it is deferred
   while correctness and the production pipeline are the priority.
